The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Iliad of Homer by Homer



This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with almost no
restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under
the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or
online at http://www.gutenberg.org/license



Title: The Iliad of Homer

Author: Homer

Release Date: September 2006 [Ebook #6130]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO 8859-1


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ILIAD OF HOMER***





The Iliad of Homer


Translated by Alexander Pope,

with notes by the
Rev. Theodore Alois Buckley, M.A., F.S.A.

and

Flaxman's Designs.

1899





CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION.
POPE'S PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER
BOOK I.
BOOK II.
BOOK III.
BOOK IV.
BOOK V.
BOOK VI.
BOOK VII.
BOOK VIII.
BOOK IX.
BOOK X.
BOOK XI.
BOOK XII.
BOOK XIII.
BOOK XIV.
BOOK XV.
BOOK XVI.
BOOK XVII.
BOOK XVIII.
BOOK XIX.
BOOK XX.
BOOK XXI.
BOOK XXII.
BOOK XXIII.
BOOK XXIV.
CONCLUDING NOTE.





ILLUSTRATIONS


HOMER INVOKING THE MUSE.
MARS.
MINERVA REPRESSING THE FURY OF ACHILLES.
THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES.
THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER.
THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES.
VULCAN.
JUPITER.
THE APOTHEOSIS OF HOMER.
JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON.
NEPTUNE.
VENUS, DISGUISED, INVITING HELEN TO THE CHAMBER OF PARIS.
VENUS PRESENTING HELEN TO PARIS.
VENUS.
Map, titled "Graeciae Antiquae".
THE COUNCIL OF THE GODS.
Map of the Plain of Troy.
VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS.
OTUS AND EPHIALTES HOLDING MARS CAPTIVE.
DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARS.
JUNO.
HECTOR CHIDING PARIS.
THE MEETING OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.
BOWS AND BOW CASE.
IRIS.
HECTOR AND AJAX SEPARATED BY THE HERALDS.
GREEK AMPHORA--WINE VESSELS.
JUNO AND MINERVA GOING TO ASSIST THE GREEKS.
THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO'S CAR.
THE SHIELD OF AMACHE FAINTING ON THE WALL.
THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS.
CERES.
HECTOR'S BODY AT THE CAR OF ACHILLES.
THE JUDGMENT OF PARIS.
IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR.
FUNERAL OF HECTOR.





INTRODUCTION.


Scepticism is as much the result of knowledge, as knowledge is of
scepticism. To be content with what we at present know, is, for the most
part, to shut our ears against conviction; since, from the very gradual
character of our education, we must continually forget, and emancipate
ourselves from, knowledge previously acquired; we must set aside old
notions and embrace fresh ones; and, as we learn, we must be daily
unlearning something which it has cost us no small labour and anxiety to
acquire.

And this difficulty attaches itself more closely to an age in which
progress has gained a strong ascendency over prejudice, and in which
persons and things are, day by day, finding their real level, in lieu of
their conventional value. The same principles which have swept away
traditional abuses, and which are making rapid havoc among the revenues of
sinecurists, and stripping the thin, tawdry veil from attractive
superstitions, are working as actively in literature as in society. The
credulity of one writer, or the partiality of another, finds as powerful a
touchstone and as wholesome a chastisement in the healthy scepticism of a
stence of
Alexander the Great, would be a more excusable act, than to believe in
that of Romulus. To deny a fact related in Herodotus, because it is
inconsistent with a theory developed from an Assyrian inscription which no
two scholars read in the same way, is more pardonable, than to believe in
the good-natured old king whom the elegant pen of Florian has
idealized--_Numa Pompilius._

Scepticism has attained its culminating point with respect to Homer, and
the state of our Homeric knowledge may be described as a free permission
to believe any theory, provided we throw overboard all written tradition,
concerning the author or authors of the Iliad and Odyssey. What few
authorities exist on the subject, are summarily and, when older, rivalled his preceptor in wisdom. Phemius
died, leaving him sole heir to his property, and his mother soon followed.
Melesigenes carried on his adopted father's school with great success,
exciting the admiration not only of the inhabitants of Smyrna, but also of
the strangers whom the trade carried on there, especially in the
exportation of corn, attracted to that city. Among these visitors, one
Mentes, from Leucadia, the modern Santa Maura, who evinced a knowledge and
intelligence rarely found in those times, persuaded Melesigenes to close
his school, and accompany him on his travels. He promised not only to pay
his expenses, but to furnish him with a further stipend, urging, that,
"While he was yet young, it was fitting that he should see with his own
eyes the countries and cities which might hereafter be the subjects of his
discourses." Melesigenes consented, and set out with his patron,
"examining all the curiosities of the countries they visited, and
informing himself of everything by interrogating those whom he met." We
may also suppose, that he wrote memoirs of all that he deemed worthy of
preservation(2) Having set sail from Tyrrhenia and Iberia, they reached
Ithaca. Here Melesigenes, who had already suffered in his eyes, became
much worse, and Mentes, who was about to leave for Leucadia, left him to
the medical superintendence of a friend of his, named Mentor, the son of
Alcinor. Under his hospitable and intelligent host, Melesigenes rapidly
became acquainted with the legends respecting Ulysses, which afterwards
formed the subject of the Odyssey. The inhabitants of Ithaca assert, that
it was here that Melesigenes became blind, but the Colophomans make their
city the seat of that misfortune. He then returned to Smyrna, where he
applied himself to the study of poetry.(3)

But poverty soon drove him to Cumae. Having passed over the Hermaean
plain, he arrived at Neon Teichos, the New Wall, a colony of Cumae. Here
his misfortunes and poetical talent g had drawn down the wrath of Jove the Hospitable.

At Erythrae, Homer fortunately met with a person who had known him in
Phocoea, by whose assistance he at length, after some difficulty, reached
the little hamlet of Pithys. Here he met with an adventure, which we will
continue in the words of our author. "Having set out from Pithys, Homer
went on, attracted by the cries of some goats that were pasturing. The
dogs barked on his approach, and he cried out. Glaucus (for that was the
name of the goat-herd) heard his voice, ran up quickly, called off his
dogs, and drove them away from Homer. For or some time he stood wondering
how a blind man should have reached such a place alone, and what could be
his design in coming. He then went up to him, and inquired who he was, and
how he had come to desolate places and untrodden spots, and of what he
stood in need. Homer, by recounting to him the whole history of his
misfortunes, moved him with compassion; and he took him, and t gratitude towards
Mentor of Ithaca, in the Odyssey, whose name he has inserted in his poem
as the companion of Ulysses,(13) in return for the care taken of him when
afflicted with blindness. He also testifies his gratitude to Phemius, who
had given him both sustenance and instruction."

His celebrity continued to increase, and many persons advised him to visit
Greece, whither his reputation had now extended. Having, it is said, made
some additions to his poems calculated to please the vanity of the
Athenians, of whose city he had hitherto made no mention,(14) he sent out
for Samos. Here being recognized by a Samian, who had met with him in
Chios, he was handsomely received, and invited to join in celebrating the
Apaturian festival. He recited some verses, which gave great satisfaction,
and by singing the Eiresione at the New Moon festivals, he earned a
subsistence, visiting the houses of the rich, with whose children he was
very popular.

In the spring he sailed for Athens, and arrived at the island of Ios, now
Ino, where he fell extremely ill, and died. It is said that his death
arose from vexation, at not having been able to unravel an enigma proposed
by some fishermen's children.(15)

Such is, in brief, the substance of the earliest life of Homer we possess,
and so broad are the evidences of its historical worthlessness, that it is
scarcely necessary to point them out in detail. Let us now consider some
of the opinions to which a persevering, patient, and learned--but by no
means consistent--series of investigations has led. In doing so, I profess
to bring forward statements, not to vouch for their reasonableness or
probability.

"Homer appeared. The history of this poet and his works is lost in
doubtful obscurity, as is the history of many of the first minds who have
done honour to humanity, because they rose amidst darkness. The majestic
stream of his song, blessing and fertilizing, flows like the Nile, through
many lands and nations; and, like the sources of tions lay claim.

At the end of the seventeenth century, doubts had begun to awaken on the
subject, and we find Bentley remarking that "Homer wrote a sequel of songs
and rhapsodies, to be sung by himself, for small comings and good cheer,
at festivals and other days of merriment. These loose songs were not
collected together, in the form of an epic poem, till about Peisistratus'
time, about five hundred years after."(23)

Two French writers--Hedelin and Perrault--avowed a similar scepticism on the
subject; but it is in the "Scienza Nuova" of Battista Vico, that we first
meet with the germ of the theory, subsequently defended by Wolf with so
much learning and acuteness. Indeed, it is with the Wolfian theory that we
have chiefly to deal, and with the following bold hypothesis, which we
will detail in the words of Grote(24)--

"Half a century ago, the acute and valuable Prolegomena of F. A. Wolf,
turning to account the Venetian Scholia, which had then been recently
published, first opened philosophical discussion as to the history of the
Homeric text. A considerable part of that dissertation (though by no means
the whole) is employed in vindicating the position, previously announced
by Bentley, amongst others, that the separate constituent portions of the
Iliad and Odyssey had not been cemented together into any compact body and
unchangeable order, until the days of Peisistratus, in the sixth century
before Christ. As a step towards that conclusion, Wolf maintained that no
written copies of either poem could be shown to have existed during the
earlier times, to which their composition is referred; and that without
writing, neither the perfect symmetry of so complicated a work could have
been originally conceived by any poet, nor, if realized by him,
transmitted with assurance to posterity. The absence of easy and
convenient writing, such as must be indispensably supposed for long
manuscripts, among the early Greeks, was thus one of the points in h its rhapsodic delivery, and with its accompaniments of a
solemn and crowded festival. The only persons for whom the written Iliad
would be suitable would be a select few; studious and curious men; a class
of readers capable of analyzing the complicated emotions which they had
experienced as hearers in the crowd, and who would, on perusing the
written words, realize in their imaginations a sensible portion of the
impression communicated by the reciter. Incredible as the statement may
seem in an age like the present, there is in all early societies, and
there was in early Greece, a time when no such reading class existed. If
we could discover at what time such a class first began to be formed, we
should be able to make a guess at the time when the old epic poems were
first committed to writing. Now the period which may with the greatest
probability be fixed upon as having first witnessed the formation even of
the narrowest reading class in Greece, is the middle of the seventh
century before the Christian aera (B.C. 660 to B.C. 630), the age of
Terpander, Kallinus, Archilochus, Simonides of Amorgus, &c. I ground this
supposition on the change then operated in the character and tendencies of
Grecian poetry and music--the elegiac and the iambic measures having been
introduced as rivals to the primitive hexameter, and poetical compositions
having been transferred from the epical past to the affairs of present and
real life. Such a change was important at a time when poetry was the only
known mode of publication (to use a modern phrase not altogether suitable,
yet the nearest approaching to the sense). It argued a new way of looking
at the old epical treasures of the people as well as a thirst for new
poetical effect; and the men who stood forward in it, may well be
considered as desirous to study, and competent to criticize, from their
own individual point of view, the written words of the Homeric rhapsodies,
just as we are told that Kallinus both noticed and eulogized the Theba  perplexed our Bentleys, to whom the name of Helen is said to have
    caused as much disquiet and distress as the fair one herself among
    the heroes of her age, however Mr. Knight may have failed in
    reducing the Homeric language to its primitive form; however,
    finally, the Attic dialect may not have assumed all its more
    marked and distinguishing characteristics--still it is difficult to
    suppose that the language, particularly in the joinings and
    transitions, and connecting parts, should not more clearly betray
    the incongruity between the more ancient and modern forms of
    expression. It is not quite in character with such a period to
    imitate an antique style, in order to piece out an imperfect poem
    in the character of the original, as Sir Walter Scott has done in
    his continuation of Sir Tristram.

    "If, however, not even such faint and indistinct traces of
    Athenian compilation are discoverable in the language of the
    poems, the total absence of Athenian national feeling is perhaps
    no less worthy of observation. In later, and it may fairly be
    suspected in earlier times, the Athenians were more than
    ordinarily jealous of the fame of their ancestors. But, amid all
    the traditions of the glories of early Greece embodied in the
    Iliad, the Athenians play a most subordinate and insignificant
    part. Even the few passages which relate to their ancestors, Mr.
    Knight suspects to be interpolations. It is possible, indeed, that
    in its leading outline, the Iliad may be true to historic fact,
    that in the great maritime expedition of western Greece against
    the rival and half-kindred empire of the Laomedontiadae, the
    chieftain of Thessaly, from his valour and the number of his
    forces, may have been the most important ally of the Peloponnesian
    sovereign; the preeminent value of the ancient poetry on the
    Trojan war may thus have forced the national feeling of the
    Athenians to yiel's funeral in the thirteenth, can only be regarded
as the result of an interpolation.

Grote, although not very distinct in stating his own opinions on the
subject, has done much to clearly show the incongruity of the Wolfian
theory, and of Lachmann's modifications with the character of
Peisistratus. But he has also shown, and we think with equal success, that
the two questions relative to the primitive unity of these poems, or,
supposing that impossible, the unison of these parts by Peisistratus, and
not before his time, are essentially distinct. In short, "a man may
believe the Iliad to have been put together out of pre-existing songs,
without recognising the age of Peisistratus as the period of its first
compilation." The friends or literary _employes_ of Peisistratus must have
found an Iliad that was already ancient, and the silence of the
Alexandrine critics respecting the Peisistratic "recension," goes far to
prove, that, among the numerous manuscripts they examined, this was either
wanting, or thought unworthy of attention.

"Moreover," he continues, "the whole tenor of the poems themselves
confirms what is here remarked. There is nothing, either in the Iliad or
Odyssey, which savours of modernism, applying that term to the age of
Peisistratus--nothing which brings to our view the alterations brought
about by two centuries, in the Greek language, the coined money, the
habits of writing and reading, the despotisms and republican governments,
the close military array, the improved construction of ships, the
Amphiktyonic convocations, the mutual frequentation of religious
festivals, the Oriental and Egyptian veins of religion, &c., familiar to
the latter epoch. These alterations Onomakritus, and the other literary
friends of Peisistratus, could hardly have failed to notice, even without
design, had they then, for the first time, undertaken the task of piecing
together many self existent epics into one large aggregate. Everything in
the two great Homeric poems, both ig, that the story which attributes the
preservation of these poems to Lycurgus, is little else than a version of
the same story as that of Peisistratus, while its historical probability
must be measured by that of many others relating to the Spartan Confucius.

I will conclude this sketch of the Homeric theories, with an attempt, made
by an ingenious friend, to unite them into something like consistency. It
is as follows:--


    "No doubt the common soldiers of that age had, like the common
    sailors of some fifty years ago, some one qualified to 'discourse
    in excellent music' among them. Many of these, like those of the
    negroes in the United States, were extemporaneous, and allusive to
    events passing around them. But what was passing around them? The
    grand events of a spirit-stirring war; occurrences likely to
    impress themselves, as the mystical legends of former times had
    done, upon their memory; besides which, a retentive memory was
    deemed a virtue of the first water, and was cultivated accordingly
    in those ancient times. Ballads at first, and down to the
    beginning of the war with Troy, were merely recitations, with an
    intonation. Then followed a species of recitative, probably with
    an intoned burden. Tune next followed, as it aided the memory
    considerably.

    "It was at this period, about four hundred years after the war,
    that a poet flourished of the name of Melesigenes, or Moeonides,
    but most probably the former. He saw that these ballads might be
    made of great utility to his purpose of writing a poem on the
    social position of Hellas, and, as a collection, he published
    these lays, connecting them by a tale of his own. This poem now
    exists, under the title of the 'Odyssea.' The author, however, did
    not affix his own name to the poem, which, in fact, was, great
    part of it, remodelled from the archaic dialect of Crete, in which
    tongue the ballads were found by him. He therefore affiliation, they cut out book after book,
passage after passage, till the author is reduced to a collection of
fragments, or till those, who fancied they possessed the works of some
great man, find that they have been put off with a vile counterfeit got up
at second hand. If we compare the theories of Knight, Wolf, Lachmann, and
others, we shall feel better satisfied of the utter uncertainty of
criticism than of the apocryphal position of Homer. One rejects what
another considers the turning-point of his theory. One cuts a supposed
knot by expunging what another would explain by omitting something else.

Nor is this morbid species of sagacity by any means to be looked upon as a
literary novelty. Justus ss to detect.

Sensible as I am of the difficulty of disproving a negative, and aware as
I must be of the weighty grounds there are for opposing my belief, it
still seems to me that the Homeric question is one that is reserved for a
higher criticism than it has often obtained. We are not by nature intended
to know all things; still less, to compass the powers by which the
greatest blessings of life have been placed at our disposal. Were faith no
virtue, then we might indeed wonder why God willed our ignorance on any
matter. But we are too well taught the contrary lesson; and it seems as
though our faith should be especially tried touching the men and the
events which have wrought most influence upon the condition of humanity.
And there is a kind of sacredness attached to the memory of the great and
the good, which seems to bid us repulse the scepticism which would
allegorizen nature; on the
    love of children, wife, and country; on that passion which
    outweighs all others, the love of glory. His songs were poured
    forth from a breast which sympathized with all the feelings of
    man; and therefore they enter, and will continue to enter, every
    breast which cherishes the same sympathies. If it is granted to
    his immortal spirit, from another heaven than any of which he
    dreamed on earth, to look down on his race, to see the nations
    from the fields of Asia to the forests of Hercynia, performing
    pilgrimages to the fountain which his magic wand caused to flow;
    if it is permitted to him to view the vast assemblage of grand, of
    elevated, of glorious productions, which had been called into
    being by means of his songs; wherever his immortal spirit may
    reside, this alone would suffice to complete his happiness."(35)


Can we contemplate that ancient monument, on which the "Apotheosis of
Homer"(36) is depictured, and not feel how much of pleasing association,
how much that appeals most forcibly and most distinctly to our minds, is
lost by the admittance of any theory but our old tradition? The more we
read, and the more we think--think as becomes the readers of Homer,--the
more rooted becomes the conviction that the Father of Poetry gave us this
rich inheritance, whole and entire. Whatever were the means of its
preservation, let us rather be thankful for the treasury of taste and
eloquence thus laid open to our use, than seek to make it a mere centre
around which to drive a series of theories, whose wildness is only
equalled by their inconsistency with each other.

As the hymns, and some other poems usually ascribed to Homer, are not
included in Pope's translation, I will content myself with a brief account
of the Battle of the Frogs and Mice, from the pen of a writer who has done
it full justice(37):--


    "This poem," says Coleridge, "is a short mock-heroic of ancient
    date. The text varies in diff ancient a date for its composition."


Having thus given a brief account of the poems comprised in Pope's design,
I will now proceed to make a few remarks on his translation, and on my own
purpose in the present edition.

Pope was not a Grecian. His whole education had been irregular, and his
earliest acquaintance with the poet was through the version of Ogilby. It
is not too much to say that his whole work bears the impress of a
disposition to be satisfied with the general sense, rather than to dive
deeply into the minute and delicate features of language. Hence his whole
work is to be looked upon rather as an elegant paraphrase than a
translation. There are, to be sure, certain conventional anecdotes, which
prove that Pope consulted various friends, whose classical attainments
were sounder than his own, during the undertaking; but it is probable that
these examinations were the result rather of the contradictory versions
already existing, than of a desire to make a perfect transcript of the
original. And in those days, what is called literal translation was less
cultivated than at present. If something like the general sense could be
decorated with the easy gracefulness of a practised poet; if the charms of
metrical cadence and a pleasing fluency could be made consistent with a
fair interpretation of the poet's meaning, his _words_ were less jealously
sought for, and those who could read so good a poem as Pope's Iliad had
fair reason to be satisfied.

It would be absurd, therefore, to test Pope's translation by our own
advancing knowledge of the original text. We must be content to look at it
as a most delightful work in itself,--a work which is as much a part of
English literature as Homer himself is of Greek. We must not be torn from
our kindly associations with the old Iliad, that once was our most
cherished companion, or our most looked-for prize, merely because
Buttmann, Loewe, and Liddell have made us so much more accurate as to
amphikupellon being an adjectiv other annotations, while utterly disclaiming
high scholastic views, will be found to convey as much as is wanted; at
least, as far as the necessary limits of these volumes could be expected
to admit. To write a commentary on Homer is not my present aim; but if I
have made Pope's translation a little more entertaining and instructive to
a mass of miscellaneous readers, I shall consider my wishes satisfactorily
accomplished.

                                                   THEODORE ALOIS BUCKLEY.

_Christ Church._





POPE'S PREFACE TO THE ILIAD OF HOMER


Homer is universally allowed to have had the greatest invention of any
writer whatever. The praise of judgment Virgil has justly contested with
him, and others may have their pretensions as to particular excellences;
but his invention remains yet unrivalled. Nor is it a wonder if he has
ever been acknowledged the greatest of poets, who most excelled in that
which is the very foundation of poetry. It is the invention that, in
different degrees, distinguishes all great geniuses: the utmost stretch of
human study, learning, and industry, which masters everything besides, can
never attain to this. It furnishes art with all her materials, and without
it judgment itself can at best but "steal wisely:" for art is only like a
prudent steward that lives on managing the riches of nature. Whatever
praises may be given to works of judgment, there is not even a single
beauty in them to which the invention must not contribute: as in the most
regular gardens, art can only reduce beauties of nature to more
regularity, and such a figure, which the common eye may better take in,
and is, therefore, more entertained with. And, perhaps, the reason why
common critics are inclined to prefer a judicious and methodical genius to
a great and fruitful one, is, because they find it easier for themselves
to pursue their observations through a uniform and bounded walk of art,
than to comprehend the vast and various extent of nature.

Ouoldly informed of what was said or done as from a
third person; the reader is hurried out of himself by the force of the
poet's imagination, and turns in one place to a hearer, in another to a
spectator. The course of his verses resembles that of the army he
describes,

  Hoid' ar' isan hosei te puri chthon pasa nemoito.

"They pour along like a fire that sweeps the whole earth before it." It
is, however, remarkable, that his fancy, which is everywhere vigorous, is
not discovered immediately at the beginning of his poem in its fullest
splendour: it grows in the progress both upon himself and others, and
becomes on fire, like a chariot-wheel, by its own rapidity. Exact
disposition, just thought, correct elocution, polished numbers, may have
been found in a thousand; but this poetic fire, this "vivida vis animi,"
in a very few. Even in works where all those are imperfect or neglected,
this can overpower criticism, and make us admire even while we disapprove.
Nay, where this appears, though attended with absurdities, it brightens
all the rubbish about it, till we see nothing but its own splendour. This
fire is discerned in Virgil, but discerned as through a glass, reflected
from Homer, more shining than fierce, but everywhere equal and constant:
in Lucan and Statius it bursts out in sudden, short, and interrupted
flashes: In Milton it glows like a furnace kept up to an uncommon ardour
by the force of art: in Shakspeare it strikes before we are aware, like an
accidental fire from aeaven: but in Homer, and in him only, it burns
everywhere clearly and everywhere irresistibly.

I shall here endeavouRinaldo by Armida. If Achilles be absent from the army on the
score of a quarrel through half the poem, Rinaldo must absent himself just
as long on the like account. If he gives his hero a suit of celestial
armour, Virgil and Tasso make the same present to theirs. Virgil has not
only observed this close imitation of Homer, but, where he had not led the
way, supplied the want from other Greek authors. Thus the story of Sinon,
and the taking of Troy, was copied (says Macrobius) almost word for word
from Pisander, as the loves of Dido and Ćneas are taken from those of
Medea and Jason in Apollonius, and several others in the same manner.

To proceed to the allegorical fable--If we reflect upon those innumerable
knowledges, those secrets of nature and physical philosophy which Homer is
generally supposed to have wrapped up in his allegories, what a new and
ample scene of wonder may this consideration afford us! How fertile will
that imagination appear, which as able to clothe all the properties of
elements, the qualifications of the mind, the virtues and vices, in forms
and persons, and to introduce them into actions agreeable to the nature of
the things they shadowed! This is a field in which no succeeding poets
could dispute with Homer, and whatever commendations have been allowed
them on this head, are by no means for their invention in having enlarged
his circle, but for their judgment in having contracted it. For when the
mode of learning changed in the following ages, and science was delivered
in a plainer manner, it then became as reasonable in the more modern poets
to lay it aside, as it was in Homer to make use of it. And perhaps it was
no unhappy circumstance for Virgil, that there was not in his time that
demand upon him of so great an invention as might be capable of furnishing
all those allegorical parts of a poem.

The marvellous fable includes whatever is supernatural, and especially the
machines of the gods. If Homer was not the first who introduced the
deitiees care to give a tincture of that principal one. For example: the main
characters of Ulysses and Nestor consist in wisdom; and they are distinct
in this, that the wisdom of one is artificial and various, of the other
natural, open, and regular. But they have, besides, characters of courage;
and this quality also takes a different turn in each from the difference
of his prudence; for one in the war depends still upon caution, the other
upon experience. It would be endless to produce instances of these kinds.
The characters of Virgil are far from striking us in this open manner;
they lie, in a great degree, hidden and undistinguished; and, where they
are marked most evidently affect us not in proportion to those of Homer.
His characters of valour are much alike; even that of Turnus seems no way
peculiar, but, as it is, in a superior degree; and we see nothing that
differences the courage of Mnestheus from that of Sergestus, Cloanthus, or
the rest, In like manner it may be remarked of Statius's heroes, that an
air of impetuosity runs through them all; the same horrid and savage
courage appears in his Capaneus, Tydeus, Hippomedon, &c. They have a
parity of character, which makes them seem brothers of one family. I
believe when the reader is led into this tract of reflection, if he will
pursue it through the epic and tragic writers, he will be convinced how
infinitely superior, in this point, the invention of Homer was to that of
all others.

The speeches are to be considered as they flow from the characters; being
perfect or defective as they agree or disagree with the manners, of those
who utter them. As there is more variety of characters in the Iliad, so
there is of speeches, than in any other poem. "Everything in it has
manner" (as Aristotle expresses it), that is, everything is acted or
spoken. It is hardly credible, in a work of such length, how small a
number of lines are employed in narration. In Virgil the dramatic part is
less in proportion to the narrative, and thety of incidents, that no one bears a likeness to another;
such different kinds of deaths, that no two heroes are wounded in the same
manner, and such a profusion of noble ideas, that every battle rises above
the last in greatness, horror, and confusion. It is certain there is not
near that number of images and descriptions in any epic poet, though every
one has assisted himself with a great quantity out of him; and it is
evident of Virgil especially, that he has scarce any comparisons which are
not drawn from his master.

If we descend from hence to the expression, we see the bright imagination
of Homer shining out in the most enlivened forms of it. We acknowledge him
the father of poetical diction; the first who taught that "language of the
gods" to men. His expression is like the colouring of some great masters,
which discovers itself to be laid on boldly, and executed with rapidity.
It is, indeed, the strongest and most glowing imaginable, and touched with
the greatest spirit. Aristotle had reason to say, he was the only poet who
had found out "living words;" there are in him more daring figures and
metaphors than in any good author whatever. An arrow is "impatient" to be
on the wing, a weapon "thirsts" to drink the blood of an enemy, and the
like, yet his expression is never too big for the sense, but justly great
in proportion to it. It is the sentiment that swells and fills out the
diction, which rises with it, and forms itself about it, for in the same
degree that a thought is warmer, an expression will be brighter, as that
is more strong, this will become more perspicuous; like glass in the
furnace, which grows to a greater magnitude, and refines to a greater
clearness, only as the breath within is more powerful, and the heat more
intense.

To throw his language more out of prose, Homer seems to have affected the
compound epithets. This was a sort of composition peculiarly proper to
poetry, not only as it heightened the diction, but as it assisted and
filled the  beauties in this
kind, in his treatise of the Composition of Words. It suffices at present
to observe of his numbers, that they flow with so much ease, as to make
one imagine Homer had no other care than to transcribe as fast as the
Muses dictated, and, at the same time, with so much force and inspiriting
vigour, that they awaken and raise us like the sound of a trumpet. They
roll along as a plentiful river, always in motion, and always full; while
we are borne away by a tide of verse, the most rapid, and yet the most
smooth imaginable.

Thus on whatever side we contemplate Homer, what principally strikes us is
his invention. It is that which forms the character of each part of his
work; and accordingly we find it to have made his fable more extensive and
copious than any other, his manners more lively and strongly marked, his
speeches more affecting and transported, his sentiments more warm and
sublime, his images and descriptions more full and animated, his
expression more raised and daring, and his numbers more rapid and various.
I hope, in what has been said of Virgil, with regard to any of these
heads, I have no way derogated from his character. Nothing is more absurd
or endless, than the common method of comparing eminent writers by an
opposition of particular passages in them, and forming a judgment from
thence of their merit upon the whole. We ought to have a certain knowledge
of the principal character and distinguishing excellence of each: it is in
that we are to consider him, and in proportion to his degree in that we
are to admire him. No author or man ever excelled all the world in more
than one faculty; and as Homer has done this in invention, Virgil has in
judgment. Not that we are to think that Homer wanted judgment, because
Virgil had it in a more eminent degree; or that Virgil wanted invention,
because Homer possessed a larger share of it; each of these great authetimes sink to suspicion, so may a great judgment decline to coldness;
and as magnanimity may run up to profusion or extravagance, so may a great
invention to redundancy or wildness. If we look upon Homer in this view,
we shall perceive the chief objections against him to proceed from so
noble a cause as the excess of this faculty.

Among these we may reckon some of his marvellous fictions, upon which so
much criticism has been spent, as surpassing all the bounds of
probability. Perhaps it may be with great and superior souls, as with
gigantic bodies, which, ex which might set the Odyssey above the Ćneis; as that the
hero is a wiser man, and the action of the one more beneficial to his
country than that of the other; or else they blame him for not doing what
he never designed; as because Achilles is not as good and perfect a prince
as Ćneas, when the very moral of his poem required a contrary character:
it is thus that Rapin judges in his comparison of Homer and Virgil. Others
select those particular passages of Homer which are not so laboured as
some that Virgil drew out of them: this is the whole management of
Scaliger in his Poetics. Others quarrel with what they take for low and
mean expressions, sometimes through a false delicacy and refinement,
oftener from an ignorance of the graces of the original, and then triumph
in the awkwardness of their own translations: this is the conduct of
Perrault in his Parallels. Lastly, there are others, who, pretending to a
fairer proceeding, distinguish between the personal merit of Homer, and
that of his work; but when they come to assign the causes of the great
reputation of the Iliad, they found it upon the ignorance of his times,
and the prejudice of those that followed: and in pursuance of this
principle, they make those accidents (such as the contention of the
cities, &c.) to be the causes of his fame, which were in reality the
consequences of his merit. The same might as well be said of Virgil, or
any great author whose general character will infallibly raise many casual
additions to their reputation. This is the method of Mons. de la Mott; who
yet confesses upon the whole that in whatever age Homer had lived, he must
have been the greatest poet of his nation, and that he may be said in his
sense to be the master even of those who surpassed him.(39)

In all these objections we see nothing that contradicts his title to the
honour of the chief invention: and as long as this (which is indeed the
characteristic of poetry itself) remains unequalled by his followers, he
still continues
literal. I know no liberties one ought to take, but those which are
necessary to transfusing the spirit of the original, and supporting the
poetical style of the translation: and I will venture to say, there have
not been more men misled in former times by a servile, dull adherence to
the letter, than have been deluded in ours by a chimerical, insolent hope
of raising and improving their author. It is not to be doubted, that the
fire of the poem is what a translator should principally regard, as it is
most likely to expire in his managing: however, it is his safest way to be
content with preserving this to his utmost in the whole, without
endeavouring to be more than he finds his author is, in any particular
place. It is a great secret in writing, to know when to be plain, and when
poetical and figurative; and it is what Homer will teach us, if we will
but follow modestly in his footsteps. Where his diction is bold and lofty,
let us raise ours as high as we can; but where his is plain and humble, we
ought not to be deterred from imitating him by the fear of incurring the
censure of a mere English critic. Nothing that belongs to Homer seems to
have been more commonly mistaken than the just pitch of his style: some of
his translators having swelled into fustian in a proud confidence of the
sublime; others sunk into flatness, in a cold and timorous notion of
simplicity. Methinks I see these different followers of Homer, some
sweating and straining after him by violent leaps and bounds (the certain
signs of false mettle), others slowly and servilely creeping in his train,
while the poet himself is all the time proceeding with an unaffected and
equal majesty before them. However, of the two extremes one could sooner
pardon frenzy than frigidity; no author is to be envied for such
commendations, as he may gain by that character of style, which his
friends must agree together to call simplicity, and the rest of the world
will call dulness. There is a graceful and dignified simpliourse bear a greater resemblance to the sacred books than that of any
hey
are employed; and in doing this properly, a translator may at once show
his fancy and his judgment.

As for Homer's repetitions, we may divide them into three sorts: of whoeremonial
of religion seems to require it, in the solemn forms of pray so much upon verbal trifles.
He appears to have had a strong affectation of extracting new meanings out
of his author; insomuch as to promise, in his rhyming preface, a poem of
the mysteries he had revealed in Homer; and perhaps he endeavoured to
strain the obvious sense to this end. His expression is involved in
fustian; a fault for which he was remarkable in his original writings, as
in the tragedy of Bussy d'Amboise, &c. In a word, the nature of the man
may account for his whole performance; for he appears, from his preface
and remarks, to have been of an arrogant turn, and an enthusiast in
poetry. His own boast, of having finished half the Iliad in less than
fifteen weeks, shows with what negligence his version was performed. But
that which is to be allowed him, and which very much contributed to cover
his defects, is a daring fiery spirit that animates his translation, which
is something like what one might imagine Homer himself would have writ
before he arrived at years of discretion.

Hobbes has given us a correct explanation of the sense in general; but for
particulars and circumstances he continually lops them, and often omits
the most beautiful. As for its being esteemed a close translation, I doubt
not many have been led into that error by the shortness of it, which
proceeds not from his following the original line by line, but from the
contractions above mentioned. He sometimes omits whole similes and
sentences; and is now and then guilty of mistakes, into which no writer of
his learning could have fallen, but through carelessness. His poetry, as
well as Ogilby's, is too mean for criticism.

It is a great loss to the poetical world that Mr. Dryden did not live to
translate the Iliad. He has left us only the first book, and a small part
of the sixth; in which if he has in some places not truly interpreted the
sense, or preserved the antiquities, it ought to be excused on account of
the haste he was obliged to write in. He seems to have had too much regard
to  shall take a
further opportunity of doing justice to the last, whose good nature (to
give it a great panegyric), is no less extensive than his learning. The
favour of these gentlemen is not entirely undeserved by one who bears them
so true an affection. But what can I say of the honour so many of the
great have done me; while the first names of the age appear as my
subscribers, and the most distinguished patrons and ornaments of learning
as my chief encouragers? Among these it is a particular pleasure to me to
find, that my highest obligations are to such who have done most honour to
the name of poet: that his grace the Duke of Buckingham was not displeased
I should undertake the author to whom he has given (in his excellent
Essay), so complete a praise:

  "Read Homer once, and you can read no more;
  For all books else appear so mean, so poor,
  Verse will seem prose: but still persist to read,
  And Homer will be all the books you need."

That the Earl of Halifax was one of the first to favour me; of whom it is
hard to say whether the advancement of the polite arts is more owing to
his generosity or his example: that such a genius as my Lord Bolingbroke,
not more distinguished in the great scenes of business, than in all the
useful and entertaining parts of learning, has not refused to be the
critic of these sheets, and the patron of their writer: and that the noble
author of the tragedy of "Heroic Love" has continued his partiality to me,
from my writing pastorals to my attempting the Iliad. I cannot deny myself
the pride of confessing, that I have had the advantage not only of their
advice for the conduct in general, but their correction of several
particulars of this translation.

I could say a great deal of the pleasure of being distinguished by the
Earl of Carnarvon; but it is almost absurd to particularize any one
generous action in a person whose whole life is a continued series of
them. Mr. Stanhope, the present secretary of state, will pardon my desire
oflles calls a council, and encourages Chalcas to declare
the cause of it; who attributes it to the refusal of Chryseis. The king,
being obliged to send back his captive, enters into a furious contest with
Achilles, which Nestor pacifies; however, as he had the absolute command
of the army, he seizes on Briseis in revenge. Achilles in discontent
withdraws himself and his forces from the rest of the Greeks; and
complaining to Thetis, she supplicates Jupiter to render them sensible of
the wrong done to her son, by giving victory to the Trojans. Jupiter,
granting her suit, incenses Juno: between whom the debate runs high, till
they are reconciled by the address of Vulcan.

The time of two-and-twenty days is taken up in this book: nine during the
plague, one in the council and quarrel of the princes, and twelve for
Jupiter's stay with the Ćthiopians, at whose return Thetis prefers her
petition. The scene lies in the Grecian camp, then changes to Chrysa, and
lastly to Olympus.

  Achilles' wrath, to Greece the direful spring
  Of woes unnumber'd, heavenly goddess, sing!
  That wrath which hurl'd to Pluto's gloomy reign
  The souls of mighty chiefs untimely slain;
  Whose limbs unburied on the naked shore,
  Devouring dogs and hungry vultures tore.(41)
  Since great Achilles and Atrides strove,
  Such was the sovereign doom, and such the will of Jove!(42)

  Declare, O Muse! in what ill-fated hour(43)
  Sprung the fierce strife, from what offended power
  Latona's son a dire contagion spread,(44)
  And heap'd the camp with mountains of the dead;
  The king of men his reverent priest defied,(45)
  And for the king's offence the people died.

  For Chryses sought with costly gifts to gain
  His captive daughter from the victor's chain.
  Suppliant the venerable father stands;
  Apollo's awful ensigns grace his hands
  By these he begs; and lowly bending down,
  Extends the sceptre and the laurel crown
  He sued to all, but chief implored for grace
  The brother-kings, ofor dreams descend from Jove.(53)
  If broken vows this heavy curse have laid,
  Let altars smoke, and hecatombs be paid.
  So Heaven, atoned, shall dying Greece restore,
  And Phoebus dart his burning shafts no more."

  He said, and sat: when Chalcas thus replied;
  Chalcas the wise, the Grecian priest and guide,
  That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view,
  The past, the present, and the future knew:
  Uprising slow, the venerable sage
  Thus spoke the prudence and the fears of age:

  "Beloved of Jove, Achilles! would'st thou know
  Why angry Phoebus bends his fatal bow?
  First give thy faith, and plight a prince's word
  Of sure protection, by thy power and sword:
  For I must speak what wisdom would conceal,
  And truths, invidious to the great, reveal,
  Bold is the task, when subjects, grown too wise,
  Instruct a monarch where his error lies;
  For though we deem the short-lived fury past,
  'Tis sure the mighty will revenge at last."
  To whom Pelides:--"From thy inmost soul
  Speak what thou know'st, and speak without control.
  E'en by that god I swear who rules the day,
  To whom thy hands the vows of Greece convey.
  And whose bless'd oracles thy lips declare;
  Long as Achilles breathes this vital air,
  No daring Greek, of all the numerous band,
  Against his priest shall lift an impious hand;
  Not e'en the chief by whom our hosts are led,
  The king of kings, shall touch that sacred head."

  Encouraged thus, the blameless man replies:
  "Nor vows unpaid, nor slighted sacrifice,
  But he, our chief, provoked the raging pest,
  Apollo's vengeance for his injured priest.
  Nor will the god's awaken'd fury cease,
  But plagues shall spread, and funeral fires increase,
  Till the great king, without a ransom paid,
  To her own Chrysa send the black-eyed maid.(54)
  Perhaps, with added sacrifice and prayer,
  The priest may pardon, and the god may spare."

  The prophet spoke: when with a gloomy frown
  The monarch started from his shining temand shall I restore the maid?
  First let the just equivalent be paid;
  Such as a king might ask; and let it be
  A treasure worthy her, and worthy me.
  Or grant me this, or with a monarch's claim
  This hand shall seize some other captive dame.
  The mighty Ajax shall his prize resign;(55)
  Ulysses' spoils, or even thy own, be mine.
  The man who suffers, loudly may complain;
  And rage he may, but he shall rage in vain.
  But this when time requires.--It now remains
  We launch a bark to plough the watery plains,
  And waft the sacrifice to Chrysa's shores,
  With chosen pilots, and with labouring oars.
  Soon shall the fair the sable ship ascend,
  And some deputed prince the charge attend:
  This Creta's king, or Ajax shall fulfil,
  Or wise Ulysses see perform'd our will;
  Or, if our royal pleasure shall ordain,
  Achilles' self conduct her o'er the main;
  Let fierce Achilles, dreadful in his rage,
  The god propitiate, and the pest assuage."

                          [Illustration: MARS.]

                                  MARS.


  At this, Pelides, frowning stern, replied:
  "O tyrant, arm'd with insolence and pride!
  Inglorious slave to interest, ever join'd
  With fraud, unworthy of a royal mind!
  What generous Greek, obedient to thy word,
  Shall form an ambush, or shall lift the sword?
  What cause have I to war at thy decree?
  The distant Trojans never injured me;
  To Phthia's realms no hostile troops they led:
  Safe in her vales my warlike coursers fed;
  Far hence removed, the hoarse-resounding main,
  And walls of rocks, secure my native reign,
  Whose fruitful soil luxuriant harvests grace,
  Rich in her fruits, and in her martial race.
  Hither we sail'd, a voluntary throng,
  To avenge a private, not a public wrong:
  What else to Troy the assembled nations draws,
  But thine, ungrateful, and thy brother's cause?
  Is this the pay our blood and toils deserve;
  Disgraced and injured by the man we serve?
  And darest thou tk,
  Which thus redoubling on Atrides broke:
  "O monster! mix'd of insolence and fear,
  Thou dog in forehead, but in heart a deer!
  When wert thou known in ambush'd fights to dare,
  Or nobly face the horrid front of war?
  'Tis ours, the chance of fighting fields to try;
  Thine to look on, and bid the valiant die:
  So much 'tis safer through the camp to go,
  And rob a subject, than despoil a foe.
  Scourge of thy people, violent and base!
  Sent in Jove's anger on a slavish race;
  Who, lost to sense of generous freedom past,
  Are tamed to wrongs;--or this had been thy last.
  Now by this sacred sceptre hear me swear,
  Which never more shall leaves or blossoms bear,
  Which sever'd from the trunk (as I from thee)
  On the bare mountains left its parent tree;
  This sceptre, form'd by temper'd steel to prove
  An ensign of the delegates of Jove,
  From whom the power of laws and justice springs
  (Tremendous oath! inviolate to kings);
  By this I swear:--when bleeding Greece again
  Shall call Achilles, she shall call in vain.
  When, flush'd with slaughter, Hector comes to spread
  The purpled shore with mountains of the dead,
  Then shall thou mourn the affront thy madness gave,
  Forced to deplore when impotent to save:
  Then rage in bitterness of soul to know
  This act has made the bravest Greek thy foe."

  He spoke; and furious hurl'd against the ground
  His sceptre starr'd with golden studs around:
  Then sternly silent sat. With like disdain
  The raging king return'd his frowns again.

  To calm their passion with the words of age,
  Slow from his seat arose the Pylian sage,
  Experienced Nestor, in persuasion skill'd;
  Words, sweet as honey, from his lips distill'd:(58)
  Two generations now had pass'd away,
  Wise by his rules, and happy by his sway;
  Two ages o'er his native realm he reign'd,
  And now the example of the third remain'd.
  All view'd with awe the venerable man;
  Who thus with mild benevolence began:--

  "What sha."

  This said, he ceased. The king of men replies:
  "Thy years are awful, and thy words are wise.
  But that imperious, that unconquer'd soul,
  No laws can limit, no respect control.
  Before his pride must his superiors fall;
  His word the law, and he the lord of all?
  Him must our hosts, our chiefs, ourself obey?
  What king can bear a rival in his sway?
  Grant that the gods his matchless force have given;
  Has foul reproach a privilege from heaven?"

  Here on the monarch's speech Achilles broke,
  And furious, thus, and interrupting spoke:
  "Tyrant, I well deserved thy galling chain,
  To live thy slave, and still to serve in vain,
  Should I submit to each unjust decree:--
  Command thy vassals, but command not me.
  Seize on Briseis, whom the Grecians doom'd
  My prize of war, yet tamely see resumed;
  And seize secure; no more Achilles draws
  His conquering sword in any woman's cause.
  The gods command me to forgive the past:
  But let this first invasion be the last:
  For know, thy blood, when next thou darest invade,
  Shall stream in vengeance on my reeking blade."

  At this they ceased: the stern debate expired:
  The chiefs in sullen majesty retired.

  Achilles with Patroclus took his way
  Where near his tents his hollow vessels lay.
  Meantime Atrides launch'd with numerous oars
  A well-rigg'd ship for Chrysa's sacred shores:
  High on the deck was fair Chryseis placed,
  And sage Ulysses with the conduct graced:
  Safe in her sides the hecatomb they stow'd,
  Then swiftly sailing, cut the liquid road.

  The host to expiate next the king prepares,
  With pure lustrations, and with solemn prayers.
  Wash'd by the briny wave, the pious train(59)
  Are cleansed; and cast the ablutions in the main.
  Along the shore whole hecatombs were laid,
  And bulls and goats to Phoebus' altars paid;
  The sable fumes in curling spires arise,
  And waft their grateful odours to the skies.

  The army thus in sacred rites engaged,
  Atrides still with deep resentment raged.
  To wait his will two sacred heralds stood,
  Talthybius and Eurybates the good.
  "Haste to the fierce Achilles' tent (he cries),
  Thence bear Briseis as our royal prize:
  Submit he must; o reclined.
  At awful distance long they silent stand,
  Loth to advance, and speak their hard command;
  Decent confusion! This the godlike man
  Perceived, and thus with accent mild began:

  "With leave and honour enter our abodes,
  Ye sacred ministers of men and gods!(60)
  I know your message; by constraint you came;
  Not you, but your imperious lord I blame.
  Patroclus, haste, the fair Briseis bring;
  Conduct my captive to the haughty king.
  But witness, heralds, and proclaim my vow,
  Witness to gods above, and men below!
  But first, and loudest, to your prince declare
  (That lawless tyrant whose commands you bear),
  Unmoved as death Achilles shall remain,
  Though prostrate Greece shall bleed at every vein:
  The raging chief in frantic passion lost,
  Blind to himself, and useless to his host,
  Unskill'd to judge the future by the past,
  In blood and slaughter shall repent at last."

   [Illustration: THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES.]

           THE DEPARTURE OF BRISEIS FROM THE TENT OF ACHILLES.


  Patroclus now the unwilling beauty brought;
  She, in soft sorrows, and in pensive thought,
  Pass'd silent, as the heralds held her hand,
  And of look'd back, slow-moving o'er the strand.
  Not so his loss the fierce Achilles bore;
  But sad, retiring to the sounding shore,
  O'er the wild margin of the deep he hung,
  That kindred deep from whence his mother sprung:(61)
  There bathed in tears of anger and disdain,
  Thus loud lamented to the stormy main:

  "O parent goddess! since in early bloom
  Thy son must fall, by too severe a doom;
  Sure to so short a race of glory born,
  Great Jove in justice should this span adorn:
  Honour and fame at leasrious boast,
  That thou stood'st forth of all the ethereal host,
  When bold rebellion shook the realms above,
  The undaunted guard of cloud-compelling Jove:
  When the bright partner of his awful reign,
  The warlike maid, and monarch of the main,
  The traitor-gods, by mad ambition driven,
  Durst threat with chains the omnipotence of Heaven.
  Then, call'd by thee, the monster Titan came
  (Whom gods Briareus, men Ćgeon name),
  Through wondering skies enormous stalk'd along;
  Not he that shakes the solid earth so strong:
  With giant-pride at Jove's high throne he stands,
  And brandish'd round him all his hundred hands:
  The affrighted gods confess'd their awful lord,
  They dropp'd the fetters, trembled, and adored.(64)
  This, goddess, this to his remembrance call,
  Embrace his knees, at his tribunal fall;
  Conjure him far to drive the Grecian train,
  To hurl them headlong to their fleet and main,
  To heap the shores with copious death, and bring
  The Greeks to know the curse of such a king.
  Let Agamemnon lift his haughty head
  O'er all his wide dominion of the dead,
  And mourn in blood that e'er he durst disgrace
  The boldest warrior of the Grecian race."

  [Illustration: THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER.]

          THETIS CALLING BRIAREUS TO THE ASSISTANCE OF JUPITER.


  "Unhappy son! (fair Thetis thus replies,
  While tears celestial trickle from her eyes)
  Why have I borne thee with a mother's throes,
  To Fates averse, and nursed for future woes?(65)
  So short a space the light of heaven to view!
  So short a space! and fill'd with sorrow too!
  O might a parent's careful wish prevail,
  Far, far from Ilion should thy vessels sail,
  And thou, from camps remote, the danger shun
  Which now, alas! too nearly threats my son.
  Yet (what I can) to move thy suit I'll go
  To great Olympus crown'd with fleecy snow.
  Meantime, secure within thy ships, from far
  Behold the field, not mingle in the war.
  The sed heads in heaven, and props the clouds.
  Suppliant the goddess stood: one hand she placed
  Beneath his beard, and one his knees embraced.
  "If e'er, O father of the gods! (she said)
  My words could please thee, or my actions aid,
  Some marks of honour on my son bestow,
  And pay in glory what in life you owe.
  Fame is at least by heavenly promise due
  To life so short, and now dishonour'd too.
  Avenge this wrong, O ever just and wise!
  Let Greece be humbled, and the Trojans rise;
  Till the proud king and all the Achaian race
  Shall heap with honours him they now disgrace."

      [Illustration: THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES.]

              THETIS ENTREATING JUPITER TO HONOUR ACHILLES.


  Thus Thetis spoke; but Jove in silence held
  The sacred counsels of his breast conceal'd.
  Not so repulsed, the goddess closer press'd,
  Still grasp'd his knees, and urged the dear request.
  "O sire of gods and men! thy suppliant hear;
  Refuse, or grant; for what has Jove to fear?
  Or oh! declare, of all the powers above,
  Is wretched Thetis least the care of Jove?"

  She said; and, sighing, thus the god replies,
  Who rolls the thunder o'er the vaulted skies:

  "What hast thou ask'd? ah, why should Jove engage
  In foreign contests and domestic rage,
  The gods' complaints, and Juno's fierce alarms,
  While I, too partial, aid the Trojan arms?
  Go, lest the haughty partner of my sway
  With jealous eyes thy close access survey;
  But part in peace, secure thy prayer is sped:
  Witness the sacred honours of our head,
  The nod that ratifies the will divine,
  The faithful, fix'd, irrevocable sign;
  This seals thy suit, and this fulfils thy vows--"
  He spoke, and awful bends his sable brows,(70)
  Shakes his ambrosial curls, and gives the nod,
  The stamp of fate and sanction of the god:
  High heaven with trembling the dread signal took,
  And all Olympus to the centre shook.(71)

  Swift to the seas profound the goddess flies,
rm'd queen received
  Then, to the rest he fill'd; and in his turn,
  Each to his lips applied the nectar'd urn,
  Vulcan with awkward grace his office plies,
  And unextinguish'd laughter shakes the skies.

  Thus the blest gods the genial day prolong,
  In feasts ambrosial, and celestial song.(75)
  Apollo tuned the lyre; the Muses round
  With voice alternate aid the silver sound.
  Meantime the radiant sun to mortal sight
  Descending swift, roll'd down the rapid light:
  Then to their starry domes the gods depart,
  The shining monuments of Vulcan's art:
  Jove on his couch reclined his awful head,
  And Juno slumber'd on the golden bed.

                         [Illustration: JUPITER.]air,(77)
  To Agamemnon's ample tent repair.
  Bid him in arms draw forth the embattled train,
  Lead all his Grecians to the dusty plain.
  Declare, e'en now 'tis given him to destroy
  The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
  For now no more the gods with fate contend,
  At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
  Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
  And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall."

  Swift as the word the vain illusion fled,
  Descends, and hovers o'er Atrides' head;
  Clothed in the figure of the Pylian sage,
  Renown'd for wisdom, and revered for age:
  Around his temples spreads his golden wing,
  And thus the flattering dream deceives the king.

       [Illustration: JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON.]

               JUPITER SENDING THE EVIL DREAM TO AGAMEMNON.


  "Canst thou, with all a monarch's cares oppress'd,
  O Atreus' son! canst thou indulge the rest?(78)
  Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,
  Directs in council, and in war presides,
  To whom its safety a whole people owes,
  To waste long nights in indolent repose.(79)
  Monarch, awake! 'tis Jove's command I bear;
  Thou, and thy glory, claim his heavenly care.
  In just array draw forth the embattled train,
  Lead all thy Grecians to the dusty plain;
  E'en now, O king! 'tis given thee to destroy
  The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
  For now no more the gods with fate contend,
  At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
  Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
  And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.
  Awake, but waking this advice approve,
  And trust the vision that descends from Jove."

  The phantom said; then vanish'd from his sight,
  Resolves to air, and mixes with the night.
  A thousand schemes the monarch's mind employ;
  Elate in thought he sacks untaken Troy:
  Vain as he was, and to the future blind,
  Nor saw what Jove and secret fate design'd,
  What mighty toils to either host remain,
  What scenes of grief, and numbrates! with attentive ear
  Receive my words, and credit what you hear.
  Late as I slumber'd in the shades of night,
  A dream divine appear'd before my sight;
  Whose visionary form like Nestor came,
  The same in habit, and in mien the same.(80)
  The heavenly phantom hover'd o'er my head,
  'And, dost thou sleep, O Atreus' son? (he said)
  Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,
  Directs in council, and in war presides;
  To whom its safety a whole people owes,
  To waste long nights in indolent repose.
  Monarch, awake! 'tis Jove's command I bear,
  Thou and thy glory claim his heavenly care.
  In just array draw forth the embattled train,
  And lead the Grecians to the dusty plain;
  E'en now, O king! 'tis given thee to destroy
  The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
  For now no more the gods with fate contend,
  At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
  Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
  And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.

  This hessful war.
  To move the troops to measure back the main,
  Be mine; and yours the province to detain."

  He spoke, and sat: when Nestor, rising said,
  (Nestor, whom Pylos' sandy realms obey'd,)
  "Princes of Greece, your faithful ears incline,
  Nor doubt the vision of the powers divine;
  Sent by great Jove to him who rules the host,
  Forbid it, heaven! this warning should be lost!
  Then let us haste, obey the god's alarms,
  And join to rouse the sons of Greece to arms."

  Thus spoke the sage: the kings without delay
  Dissolve the council, and their chief obey:
  The sceptred rulers lead; the following host,
  Pour'd forth by thousands, darkens all the coast.
  As from some rocky cleft the shepherd sees
  Clustering in heaps on heaps the driving bees,
  Rolling and blackening, swarms succeeding swarms,
  With deeper murmurs and more hoarse alarms;
  Dusky they spread, a close embodied crowd,
  And o'er the vale descends the living cloud.(81)
  So, from the tents and ships, a lengthen'd train
  Spreads all the beach, and wide o'ershades the plain:
  Along the region runs a deafening sound;
  Beneath their footsteps groans the trembling ground.
  Fame flies before the messenger of Jove,
  And shining soars, and claps her wings above.
  Nine sacred heralds now, proclaiming loud(82)
  The monarch's will, suspend the listening crowd.
  Soon as the throngs in order ranged appear,
  And fainter murmurs died upon the ear,
  The king of kings his awful figure raised:
  High in his hand the golden sceptre blazed;
  The golden sceptre, of celestial flame,
  By Vulcan form'd, from Jove to Hermes came.
  To Pelops he the immortal gift resign'd;
  The immortal gift great Pelops left behind,
  In Atreus' hand, which not with Atreus ends,
  To rich Thyestes next the prize descends;
  And now the mark of Agamemnon's reign,
  Subjects all Argos, and controls the main.(83)

  On this bright sceptre now the king reclined,
  And artful thus pronounced the speech desigskies.
  E'en then the Greeks had left the hostile plain,
  And fate decreed the fall of Troy in vain;
  But Jove's imperial queen their flight survey'd,
  And sighing thus bespoke the blue-eyed maid:

  "Shall then the Grecians fly! O dire disgrace!
  And leave unpunish'd this perfidious race?
  Shall Troy, shall Priam, and the adulterous spouse,
  In peace enjoy the fruits of broken vows?
  And bravest chiefs, in Helen's quarrel slain,
  Lie unrevenged on yon detested plain?
  No: let my Greeks, unmoved by vain alarms,
  Once more refulgent shine in brazen arms.
  Haste, goddess, haste! the flying host detain,
  Nor let one sail be hoisted on the main."

  Pallas obeys, and from Olympus' height
  Swift to the ships precipitates her flight.
  Ulysses, first in public cares, she found,
  For prudent counsel like the gods renown'd:
  Oppress'd with generous grief the hero stood,
  Nor drew his sable vessels to the flood.
  "And is it th sound,
  The rocks remurmur and the deeps rebound.
  At length the tumult sinks, the noises cease,
  And a still silence lulls the camp to peace.
  Thersites only clamour'd in the throng,
  Loquacious, loud, and turbulent of tongue:
  Awed by no shame, by no respect controll'd,
  In scandal busy, in reproaches bold:
  With witty malice studious to defame,
  Scorn all his joy, and laughter all his aim:--
  But chief he gloried with licentious style
  To lash the great, and monarchs to revile.
  His figure such as might his soul proclaim;
  One eye was blinking, and one leg was lame:
  His mountain shoulders half his breast o'erspread,
  Thin hairs bestrew'd his long misshapen head.
  Spleen to mankind his envious heart possess'd,
  And much he hated all, but most the best:
  Ulysses or Achilles still his theme;
  But royal scandal his delight supreme,
  Long had he lived the scorn of every Greek,
  Vex'd when he spoke, yet still they heard him speak.
  Sharp was his voice; which in the shrillest tone,
  Thus with injurious taunts attack'd the throne.

  "Amidst the glories of so bright a reign,
  What moves the great Atrides to complain?
  'Tis thine whate'er the warrior's breast inflames,
  The golden spoil, and thine the lovely dames.
  With all the wealth our wars and blood bestow,
  Thy tents are crowded and thy chests o'erflow.
  Thus at full ease in heaps of riches roll'd,
  What grieves the monarch? Is it thirst of gold?
  Say, shall we march with our unconquer'd powers
  (The Greeks and I) to Ilion's hostile towers,
  And bring the race of royal bastards here,
  For Troy to ransom at a price too dear?
  But safer plunder thy own host supplies;
  Say, wouldst thou seize some valiant leader's prize?
  Or, if thy heart to generous love be led,
  Some captive fair, to bless thy kingly bed?
  Whate'er our master craves submit we must,
  Plagued with his pride, or punish'd for his lust.
  Oh women of Achaia; men no more!
  Hence let us fly, and let him was rises in the crown's defence,
  To curb the factious tongue of insolence,
  Such just examples on offenders shown,
  Sedition silence, and assert the throne."

  'Twas thus the general voice the hero praised,
  Who, rising, high the imperial sceptre raised:
  The blue-eyed Pallas, his celestial friend,
  (In form a herald,) bade the crowds attend.
  The expecting crowds in still attention hung,
  To hear the wisdom of his heavenly tongue.
  Then deeply thoughtful, pausing ere he spoke,
  His silence thus the prudent hero broke:

  "Unhappy monarch! whom the Grecian race
  With shame deserting, heap with vile disgrace.
  Not such at Argos was their generous vow:
  Once all their voice, but ah! forgotten now:
  Ne'er to return, was then the common cry,
  Till Troy's proud structures should in ashes lie.
  Behold them weeping for their native shore;
  What could their wives or helpless children more?
  What heart but melts to leave the tender train,
  And, one short month, endure the wintry main?
  Few leagues removed, we wish our peaceful seat,
  When the ship tosses, and the tempests beat:
  Then well may this long stay provoke their tears,
  The tedious length of nine revolving years.
  Not for their grief the Grecian host I blame;
  But vanquish'd! baffled! oh, eternal shame!
  Expect the time to Troy's destruction given.
  And try the faith of Chalcas and of heaven.
  What pass'd at Aulis, Greece can witness bear,(89)
  And all who live to breathe this Phrygian air.
  Beside a fountain's sacred brink we raised
  Our verdant altars, and the victims blazed:
  'Twas where the plane-tree spread its shades around,
  The altars heaved; and from the crumbling ground
  A mighty dragon shot, of dire portent;
  From Jove himself the dreadful sign was sent.
  Straight to the tree his sanguine spires he roll'd,
  And curl'd around in many a winding fold;
  The topmost branch a mother-bird possess'd;
  Eight callow infants fill'd the mossy nest;
  Herself the ninth; tops to base, inglorious flight,
  Stand forth that Greek! and hoist his sail to fly,
  And die the dastard first, who dreads to die.
  But now, O monarch! all thy chiefs advise:(91)
  Nor what they offer, thou thyself despise.
  Among those counsels, let not mine be vain;
  In tribes and nations to divide thy train:
  His separate troops let every leader call,
  Each strengthen each, and all encourage all.
  What chief, or soldier, of the numerous band,
  Or bravely fights, or ill obeys command,
  When thus distinct they war, shall soon be known
  And what the cause of Ilion not o'erthrown;
  If fate resists, or if our arms are slow,
  If gods above prevent, or men below."

  To him the king: "How much thy years excel
  In arts of counsel, and in speaking well!
  O would the gods, in love to Greece, decree
  But ten such sages as they grant in thee;
  Such wisdom soon should Priam's force destroy,
  And soon should fall the haughty towers of Troy!
  But Jove forbids, who plunges those he hates
  In fierce contention and in vain debates:
  Now great Achilles from our aid withdraws,
  By me provoked; a captive maid the cause:
  If e'er as friends we join, the Trojan wall
  Must shake, and heavy will the vengeance fall!
  But now, ye warriors, take a short repast;
  And, well refresh'd, to bloody conflict haste.
  His sharpen'd spear let every Grecian wield,
  And every Grecian fix his brazen shield,
  Let all excite the fiery steeds of war,
  And all for combat fit the rattling car.
  This day, this dreadful day, let each contend;
  No rest, no respite, till the shades descend;
  Till darkness, or till death, shall cover all:
  Let the war bleed, and let the mighty fall;
  Till bathed in sweat be every manly breast,
  With the huge shield each brawny arm depress'd,
  Each aching nerve refuse the lance to throw,
  And each spent courser at the chariot blow.
  Who dares, inglorious, in his ships to stay,
  Who dares to tremble on this signal day;
  That wretch, e occasion, now the troops survey,
  And lead to war when heaven directs the way."

  He said; the monarch issued his commands;
  Straight the loud heralds call the gathering bands
  The chiefs inclose their king; the hosts divide,
  In tribes and nations rank'd on either side.
  High in the midst the blue-eyed virgin flies;
  From rank to rank she darts her ardent eyes;
  The dreadful aegis, Jove's immortal shield,
  Blazed on her arm, and lighten'd all the field:
  Round the vast orb a hundred serpents roll'd,
  Form'd the bright fringe, and seem'd to burn in gold,
  With this each Grecian's manly breast she warms,
  Swells their bold hearts, and strings their nervous arms,
  No more they sigh, inglorious, to return,
  But breathe revenge, and for the combat burn.

  As on some mountain, through the lofty grove,
  The crackling flames ascend, and blaze above;
  The fires expanding, as the winds arise,
  Shoot their long beams, and kindle half the skies:
  So from the polish'd arms, and brazen shields,
  A gleamy splendour flash'd along the fields.
  Not less their number than the embodied cranes,
  Or milk-white swans in Asius' watery plains.
  That, o'er the windings of Cayster's springs,(97)
  Stretch their long necks, and clap their rustling wings,
  Now tower aloft, and course in airy rounds,
  Now light with noise; with noise the field resounds.
  Thus numerous and confused, extending wide,
  The legions crowd Scamander's flowery side;(98)
  With rushing troops the plains are cover'd o'er,
  And thundering footsteps shake the sounding shore.
  Along the river's level meads they stand,
  Thick as in spring the flowers adorn the land,
  Or leaves the trees; or thick as insects play,
  The wandering nation of a summer's day:
  That, drawn by milky steams, at evening hours,
  In gather'd swarms surround the rural bowers;
  From pail to pail with busy murmHeleon and Hyle, which the springs o'erflow;
  And Medeon lofty, and Ocalea low;
  Or in the meads of Haliartus stray,
  Or Thespia sacred to the god of day:
  Onchestus, Neptune's celebrated groves;
  Copae, and Thisbe, famed for silver doves;
  For flocks Erythrae, Glissa for the vine;
  Platea green, and Nysa the divine;
  And they whom Thebe's well-built walls inclose,
  Where Myde, Eutresis, Corone, rose;
  And Arne rich, with purple harvests crown'd;
  And Anthedon, Boeotia's utmost bound.
  Full fifty ships they send, and each conveys
  Twice sixty warriors through the foaming seas.(102)

  To these succeed Aspledon's martial train,
  Who plough the spacious Orchomenian plain.
  Two valiant brothers rule the undaunted throng,
  Ialmen and Ascalaphus the strong:
  Sons of Astyoche, the heavenly fair,
  Whose virgin charms subdued the god of war:
  (In Actor's court as she retired to rest,
  The strength of Mars the blushing maid compress'd)
  Their troops in thirty sable vessels sweep,
  With equal oars, the hoarse-resounding deep.

  The Phocians next in forty barks repair;
  Epistrophus and Schedius head the war:
  From those rich regions where Cephisus leads
  His silver current through the flowery meads;
  From Panopea, Chrysa the divine,
  Where Anemoria's stately turrets shine,
  Where Pytho, Daulis, Cyparissus stood,
  And fair Lilaea views the rising flood.
  These, ranged in order on the floating tide,
  Close, on the left, the bold Boeotians' side.

  Fierce Ajax led the Locrian squadrons on,
  Ajax the less, Oileus' valiant son;
  Skill'd to direct the flying dart aright;
  Swift in pursuit, and active in the fight.
  Him, as their chief, the chosen troops attend,
  Which Bessa, Thronus, and rich Cynos send;
  Opus, Calliarus, and Scarphe's bands;
  And those who dwell where pleasing Augia stands,
  And where Boagrius floats the lowly lands,
  Or in fair Tarphe's sylvan seats reside:
  In forty vessels cut the yielding tide.

  Euboea ne sovereign sway:
  In fourscore barks they plough the watery way.

  The proud Mycene arms her martial powers,
  Cleone, Corinth, with imperial towers,(103)
  Fair Araethyrea, Ornia's fruitful plain,
  And Ćgion, and Adrastus' ancient reign;
  And those who dwell along the sandy shore,
  And where Pellene yields her fleecy store,
  Where Helice and Hyperesia lie,
  And Gonoessa's spires salute the sky.
  Great Agamemnon rules the numerous band,
  A hundred vessels in long order stand,
  And crowded nations wait his dread command.
  High on the deck the king of men appears,
  And his refulgent arms in triumph wears;
  Proud of his host, unrivall'd in his reign,
  In silent pomp he moves along the main.

  His brother follows, and to vengeance warms
  The hardy Spartans, exercised in arms:
  Phares and Brysia's valiant troops, and those
  Whom Lacedaemon's lofty hills inclose;
  Or Messe's towers for silver doves renown'd,
  Amyclae, Laas, Augia's happy ground,
  And those whom OEtylos' low walls contain,
  And Helos, on the margin of the main:
  These, o'er the bending ocean, Helen's cause,
  In sixty ships with Menelaus draws:
  Eager and loud from man to man he flies,
  Revenge and fury flaming in his eyes;
  While vainly fond, in fancy oft he hears
  The fair one's grief, and sees her falling tears.

  In ninety sail, from Pylos' sandy coast,
  Nestor the sag
  In forty vessels under Meges move,
  Begot by Phyleus, the beloved of Jove:
  To strong Dulichium from his sire he fled,
  And thence to Troy his hardy warriors led.

  Ulysses follow'd through the watery road,
  A chief, in wisdom equal to a god.
  With those whom Cephalenia's line inclosed,
  Or till their fields along the coast opposed;
  Or where fair Ithaca o'erlooks the floods,
  Where high Neritos shakes his waving woods,
  Where Ćgilipa's rugged sides are seen,
  Crocylia rocky, and Zacynthus green.
  These in twelve galleys with vermilion prores,
  Beneath his conduct sought the Phrygian shores.

  Thoas came next, Andraemon's valiant son,
  From Pleuron's walls, and chalky Calydon,
  And rough Pylene, and the Olenian steep,
  And Chalcis, beaten by the rolling deep.
  He led the warriors from the Ćtolian shore,
  For now the sons of OEneus were no more!
  The glories of the mighty race were fled!
  OEneus himself, and Meleager dead!
  To Thoas' care now trust the martial train,
  His forty vessels follow through the main.

  Next, eighty barks the Cretan king commands,
  Of Gnossus, Lyctus, and Gortyna's bands;
  And those who dwell where Rhytion's domes arise,
  Or white Lycastus glitters to the skies,
  Or where by Phaestus silver Jardan runs;
  Crete's hundred cities pour forth all her sons.
  These march'd, Idomeneus, beneath thy care,
  And Merion, dreadful as the god of war.

  Tlepolemus, the sun of Hercules,
  Led nine swift vessels through the foamy seas,
  From Rhodes, with everlasting sunshine bright,
  Jalyssus, Lindus, and Camirus white.
  His captive mother fierce Alcides bore
  From Ephyr's walls and Selle's winding shore,
  Where mighty towns in ruins spread the plain,
  And saw their blooming warriors early slain.
  The hero, when to manly years he grew,
  Alcides' uncle, old Licymnius, slew;
  For this, constrain'd to quit his native place,
  And shun the vengeance of the Herculean race,
  A fleet he built, and with a nu grassy Pteleon deck'd with cheerful greens,
  The bowers of Ceres, and the sylvan scenes.
  Sweet Pyrrhasus, with blooming flowerets crown'd,
  And Antron's watery dens, and cavern'd ground.
  These own'd, as chief, Protesilas the brave,
  Who now lay silent in the gloomy grave:
  The first who boldly touch'd the Trojan shore,
  And dyed a Phrygian lance with Grecian gore;
  There lies, far distant from his native plain;
  Unfinish'd his proud palaces remain,
  And his sad consort beats her breast in vain.
  His troops in forty ships Podarces led,
  Iphiclus' son, and brother to the dead;
  Nor he unworthy to command the host;
  Yet still they mourn'd their ancient leader lost.

  The men who Glaphyra's fair soil partake,
  Where hills incircle Boebe's lowly lake,
  Where Phaere hears the neighbouring waters fall,
  Or proud Iolcus lifts her airy wall,
  In ten black ships embark'd for Ilion's shore,
  With bold Eumelus, whom Alceste bore:
  All Pelias' race Alceste far outshined,
  The grace and glory of the beauteous kind,

  The troops Methone or Thaumacia yields,
  Olizon's rocks, or Meliboea's fields,
  With Philoctetes sail'd whose matchless art
  From the tough bow directs the feather'd dart.
  Seven were his ships; each vessel fifty row,
  Skill'd in his science of the dart and bow.
  But he lay raging on the Lemnian ground,
  A poisonous hydra gave the burning wound;
  There groan'd the chief in agonizing pain,
  Whom Greece at length shall wish, nor wish in vain.
  His forces Medon led from Lemnos' shore,
  Oileus' son, whom beauteous Rhena bore.

  The OEchalian race, in those high towers contain'd
  Where once Eurytus in proud triumph reign'd,
  Or where her humbler turrets Tricca rears,
  Or where Ithome, rough with rocks, appears,
  In thirty sail the sparkling waves divide,
  Which Podalirius and Machaon guide.
  To these his skill their parent-god imparts,
  Divine professors of the healing arts.

  The bold Ormenian and Asterian bands
 
  The unwelcome message to the Phrygian king.

  "Cease to consult, the time for action calls;
  War, horrid war, approaches to your walls!
  Assembled armies oft have I beheld;
  But ne'er till now such numbers charged a field:
  Thick as autumnal leaves or driving sand,
  The moving squadrons blacken all the strand.
  Thou, godlike Hector! all thy force employ,
  Assemble all the united bands of Troy;
  In just array let every leader call
  The foreign troops: this day demands them all!"

  The voice divine the mighty chief alarms;
  The council breaks, the warriors rush to arms.
  The gates unfolding pour forth all their train,
  Nations on nations fill the dusky plain,
  Men, steeds, and chariots, shake the trembling ground:
  The tumult thickens, and the skies resound.

  Amidst the plain, in sight of Ilion, stands
  A rising mount, the work of human hands;
  (This for Myrinne's tomb the immortals know,
  Though call'd Bateia in the world below;)
  Beneath their chiefs in martial order here,
  The auxiliar troops and Trojan hosts appear.

  The godlike Hector, high above the rest,
  Shakes his huge spear, and nods his plumy crest:
  In throngs around his native bands repair,
  And groves of lances glitter in the air.

  Divine Ćneas brings the Dardan race,
  Anchises' son, by Venus' stolen embrace,
  Born in the shades of Ida's secret grove;
  (A mortal mixing with the queen of love;)
  Archilochus and Acamas divide
  The warrior's toils, and combat by his side.

  Who fair Zeleia's wealthy valleys till,(106)
  Fast by the foot of Ida's sacred hill,
  Or drink, Ćsepus, of thy sable flood,
  Were led by Pandarus, of royal blood;
  To whom his art Apollo deign'd to show,
  Graced with the presents of his shafts and bow.

  From rich Apaesus and Adrestia's towers,
  High Teree's summits, and Pityea's bowers;
  From these the congregated troops obey
  Young Amphius and Adrastus' equal sway;
  Old Merops' sons; whom, skill'd in fates to come,
  Throm Axius' ample bed he leads them on,
  Axius, that laves the distant Amydon,
  Axius, that swells with all his neighbouring rills,
  And wide around the floating region fills.

  The Paphlagonians Pylaemenes rules,
  Where rich Henetia breeds her savage mules,
  Where Erythinus' rising cliffs are seen,
  Thy groves of box, Cytorus! ever green,
  And where Ćgialus and Cromna lie,
  And lofty Sesamus invades the sky,
  And where Parthenius, roll'd through banks of flowers,
  Reflects her bordering palaces and bowers.

  Here march'd in arms the Halizonian band,
  Whom Odius and Epistrophus command,
  From those far regions where the sun refines
  The ripening silver in Alybean mines.

  There mighty Chromis led the Mysian train,
  And augur Ennomus, inspired in vain;
  For stern Achilles lopp'd his sacred head,
  Roll'd down Scamander with the vulgar dead.

  Phorcys and brave Ascanius here unite
  The Ascanian Phrygians, eager for the fight.

  Of those who round Maeonia's realms reside,
  Or whom the vales in shades of Tmolus hide,
  Mestles and Antiphus the charge partake,
  Born on the banks of Gyges' silent lake.
  There, from the fields where wild Maeander flows,
  High Mycale, and Latmos' shady brows,
  And proud Miletus, came the Carian throngs,
  With mingled clamours and with barbarous tongues.(107)
  Amphimachus and Naustes guide the train,
  Naustes the bold, Amphimachus the vain,
  Who, trick'd with gold, and glittering on his car,
  Rode like a woman to the field of war.
  Fool that he was! by fierce Achilles slain,
  The river swept him to the briny main:
  There whelm'd with waves the gaudy warrior lies
  The valiant victor seized the golden prize.

  The forces last in fair array succeed,
  Which blameless Glaucus and Sarpedon lead
  The warlike  thicken'd day:
  So wrapp'd in gathering dust, the Grecian train,
  A moving cloud, swept on, and hid the plain.

  Now front to front the hostile armies stand,
  Eager of fight, and only wait command;
  When, to the van, before the sons of fame
  Whom Troy sent forth, the beauteous Paris came:
  In form a god! the panther's speckled hide
  Flow'd o'er his armour with an easy pride:
  His bended bow across his shoulders flung,
  His sword beside him negligently hung;
  Two pointed spears he shook with gallant grace,
  And dared the bravest of the Grecian race.

  As thus, with glorious air and proud disdain,
  He boldly stalk'd, the foremost on the plain,
  Him Menelaus, loved of Mars, espies,
  With heart elated, and with joyful eyes:
  So joys a lion, if the branching deer,
  Or mountain goat, his bulky prize, appear;
  Eager he seizes and devours the slain,
  Press'd by bold youths and baying dogs in vain.
  Thus fond of vengeance, with a furious bound,
  In clanging arms he leaps upon the ground
  From his high chariot: him, approaching near,
  The beauteous champion views with marks of fear,
  Smit with a conscious sense, retires behind,
  And shuns the fate he well deserved to find.
  As when some shepherd, from the rustling trees(110)
  Shot forth to view, a scaly serpent sees,
  Trembling and pale, he starts with wild affright
  And all confused precipitates his flight:
  So from the king the shining warrior flies,
  And plunged amid the thickest Trojans lies.

  As godlike Hector sees the prince retreat,
  He thus upbraids him with a generous heat:
  "Unhappy Paris! but to women brave!(111)
  So fairly form'd, and only to deceive!
  Oh, hadst thou died when first thou saw'st the light,
  Or died at least before thy nuptial rite!
  A better fate than vainly thus to boast,
  And fly, the scandal of thy Trojan host.
  Gods! how the scornful Greeks exult to see
  Their fears of danger undeceived in thee!
  Thy figure promised with a martial air,
  BThe good old Priam welcomed her, and cried,
  "Approach, my child, and grace thy father's side.
  See on the plain thy Grecian spouse appears,
  The friends and kindred of thy former years.
  No crime of thine our present sufferings draws,
  Not thou, but Heaven's disposing will, the cause
  The gods these armies and this force employ,
  The hostile gods conspire the fate of Troy.
  But lift thy eyes, and say, what Greek is he
  (Far as from hence these aged orbs can see)
  Around whose brow such martial graces shine,
  So tall, so awful, and almost divine!
  Though some of larger stature tread the green,
  None match his grandeur and exalted mien:
  He seems a monarch, and his country's pride."
  Thus ceased the king, and thus the fair replied:

  "Before thy presence, father, I appear,
  With conscious shame and reverential fear.
  Ah! had I died, ere to these walk I fled,
  
  My house was honour'd with each royal guest:
  I knew their persons, and admired their parts,
  Both brave in arms, and both approved in arts.
  Erect, the Spartan most engaged our view;
  Ulysses seated, greater reverence drew.
  When Atreus' son harangued the listening train,
  Just was his sense, and his expression plain,
  His words succinct, yet full, without a fault;
  He spoke no more than just the thing he ought.
  But when Ulysses rose, in thought profound,(116)
  His modest eyes he fix'd upon the ground;
  As one unskill'd or dumb, he seem'd to stand,
  Nor raised his head, nor stretch'd his sceptred hand;
  But, when he speaks, what elocution flows!
  Soft as the fleeces of descending snows,(117)
  The copious accents fall, with easy art;
  Melting they fall, and sink into the heart!
  Wondering we hear, and fix'd in deep surprise,
  Our ears refute the censure of our eyes."

  The king then ask'd (as yet the camp he view'd)
  "What chief is that, with giant strength endued,
  Whose brawny shoulders, and whose swelling chest,
  And lofty stature, far exceed the rest?
  "Ajax the great, (the beauteous queen replied,)
  Himself a host: the Grecian strength and pride.
  See! bold Idomeneus superior towers
  Amid yon circle of his Cretan powers,
  Great as a god! I saw him once before,
  With Menelaus on the Spartan shore.
  The rest I know, and could in order name;
  All valiant chiefs, and men of mighty fame.
  Yet two are wanting of the numerous train,
  Whom long my eyes have sought, but sought in vain:
  Castor and Pollux, first in martial force,
  One bold on foot, and one renown'd for horse.
  My brothers these; the same our native shore,
  One house contain'd us, as one mother bore.
  Perhaps the chiefs, from warlike toils at ease,
  For distant Troy refused to sail the seas;
  Perhaps their swords some nobler quarrel draws,
  Ashamed to combat in their sister's cause."

  So spoke the fair, nor knew her brothers' doom;(118)
  Wrapt in the nd a pointed javelin shakes.
  With equal speed and fired by equal charms,
  The Spartan hero sheathes his limbs in arms.

  Now round the lists the admiring armies stand,
  With javelins fix'd, the Greek and Trojan band.
  Amidst the dreadful vale, the chiefs advance,
  All pale with rage, and shake the threatening lance.
  The Trojan first his shining javelin threw;
  Full on Atrides' ringing shield it flew,
  Nor pierced the brazen orb, but with a bound(122)
  Leap'd from the buckler, blunted, on the ground.
  Atrides then his massy lance prepares,
  In act to throw, but first prefers his prayers:

  "Give me, great Jove! to punish lawless lust,
  And lay the Trojan gasping in the dust:
  Destroy the aggressor, aid my righteous cause,
  Avenge the breach of hospitable laws!
  Let this example future times reclaim,
  And guard from wrong fair friendship's holy name."
  Be said, and poised in air the javelin sent,
  Through Paris' shield the forceful weapon went,
  His corslet pierces, and his garment rends,
  And glancing downward, near his flank descends.
  The wary Trojan, bending from the blow,
  Eludes the death, and disappoints his foe:
  But fierce Atrides waved his sword, and strook
  Full on his casque: the crested helmet shook;
  The brittle steel, unfaithful to his hand,
  Broke short: the fragments glitter'd on the sand.
  The raging warrior to the spacious skies
  Raised his upbraiding voice and angry eyes:
  "Then is it vain in Jove himself to trust?
  And is it thus the gods assist the just?
  When crimes provoke us, Heaven success denies;
  The dart falls harmless, and the falchion flies."
  Furious he said, and towards the Grecian crew
  (Seized by the crest) the unhappy warrior drew;
  Struggling he followed, while the embroider'd thong
  That tied his helmet, dragg'd the chief along.
  Then had his ruin crown'd Atrides' joy,
  But Venus trembled for the prince of Troy:
  Unseen she came, and burst the golden band;
  And left an empty helmate fled the field, and yet survives his fame?
  O hadst thou died beneath the righteous sword
  Of that brave man whom once I call'd my lord!
  The boaster Paris oft desired the day
  With Sparta's king to meet in single fray:
  Go now, once more thy rival's rage excite,
  Provoke Atrides, and renew the fight:
  Yet Helen bids thee stay, lest thou unskill'd
  Shouldst fall an easy conquest on the field."

  The prince replies: "Ah cease, divinely fair,
  Nor add reproaches to the wounds I bear;
  This day the foe prevail'd by Pallas' power:
  We yet may vanquish in a happier hour:
  There want not gods to favour us above;
  But let the business of our life be love:
  These softer moments let delights employ,
  And kind embraces snatch the hasty joy.
  Not thus I loved thee, when from Sparta's shore
  My forced, my willing heavenly prize I bore,
  When first entranced in Cranae's isle I lay,(124)
  Mix'd with thy soul, and all dissolved away!"
  Thus having spoke, the enamour'd Phrygian boy
  Rush'd to the bed, impatient for the joy.
  Him Helen follow'd slow with bashful charms,
  And clasp'd the blooming hero in her arms.

  While these to love's delicious rapture yield,
  The stern Atrides rages round the field:
  So some fell lion whom the woods obey,
  Roars through the desert, and demands his prey.
  Paris he seeks, impatient to destroy,
  But seeks in vain along the troops of Troy;
  Even those had yielded to a foe so brave
  The recreant warrior, hateful as the grave.
  Then speaking thus, the king of kings arose,
  "Ye Trojans, Dardans, all our generous foes!
  Hear and attest! from Heaven with conquest crown'd,
  Our brother's arms the just success have found:
  Be therefore now the Spartan wealth restor'd,
  Let Argive Helen own her lawful lord;
  The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay,
  And age to age record this signal day."

  He ceased; his army's loud applauses rise,
  And the long shout runs echoing through the skies.

                 ss lust,
  Not all the gods are partial and unjust."

  The sire whose thunder shakes the cloudy skies,
  Sighs from his inmost soul, and thus replies:
  "Oh lasting rancour! oh insatiate hate
  To Phrygia's monarch, and the Phrygian state!
  What high offence has fired the wife of Jove?
  Can wretched mortals harm the powers above,
  That Troy, and Troy's whole race thou wouldst confound,
  And yon fair structures level with the ground!
  Haste, leave the skies, fulfil thy stern desire,
  Burst all her gates, and wrap her walls in fire!
  Let Priam bleed! if yet you thirst for more,
  Bleed all his sons, and Ilion float with gore:
  To boundless vengeance the wide realm be given,
  Till vast destruction glut the queen of heaven!
  So let it be, and Jove his peace enjoy,(126)
  When heaven no longer hears the name of Troy.
  But should this arm prepare to wreak our hate
  On thy loved realms, whose guilt demands their fate;
  Presume not thou the lifted bolt to stay,
  Remember Troy, and give the vengeance way.
  For know, of all the numerous towns that rise
  Beneath the rolling sun and starry skies,
  Which gods have raised, or earth-born men enjoy,
  None stands so dear to Jove as sacred Troy.
  No mortals merit more distinguish'd grace
  Than godlike Priam, or than Priam's race.
  Still to our name their hecatombs expire,
  And altars blaze with unextinguish'd fire."

  At this the goddess rolled her radiant eyes,
  Then on the Thunderer fix'd them, and replies:
  "Three towns are Juno's on the Grecian plains,
  More dear than all the extended earth contains,
  Mycenae, Argos, and the Spartan wall;(127)

  These thou mayst raze, nor I forbid their fall:
  'Tis not in me the vengeance to remove;
  The crime's sufficient that they share my love.
  Of power superior why should I complain?
  Resent I may, but must resent in vain.
  Yet some distinction Juno might require,
  Sprung with thyself from one celestial sire,
  A goddess born, to share the realms ads:
  There meditates the mark; and couching low,
  Fits the sharp arrow to the well-strung bow.
  One from a hundred feather'd deaths he chose,
  Fated to wound, and cause of future woes;
  Then offers vows with hecatombs to crown
  Apollo's altars in his native town.

  Now with full force the yielding horn he bends,
  Drawn to an arch, and joins the doubling ends;
  Close to his breast he strains the nerve below,
  Till the barb'd points approach the circling bow;
  The impatient weapon whizzes on the wing;
  Sounds the tough horn, and twangs the quivering string.

  But thee, Atrides! in that dangerous hour
  The gods forget not, nor thy guardian power,
  Pallas assists, and (weakened in its force)
  Diverts the weapon from its destined course:
  So from her babe, when slumber seals his eye,
  The watchful mother wafts the envenom'd fly.
  Just where his belt with golden buckles join'd,
  Where linen folds the double corslet lined,
  She turn'd the shaft, which, hissing from above,
  Pass'd the broad belt, and through the corslet drove;
  The folds it pierced, the plaited linen tore,
  And razed the skin, and drew the purple gore.
  As when some stately trappings are decreed
  To grace a monarch on his bounding steed,
  A nymph in Caria or Maeonia bred,
  Stains the pure ivory with a lively red;
  With equal lustre various colours vie,
  The shining whiteness, and the Tyrian dye:
  So great Atrides! show'd thy sacred blood,
  As down thy snowy thigh distill'd the streaming flood.
  With horror seized, the king of men descried
  The shaft infix'd, and saw the gushing tide:
  Nor less the Spartan fear'd, before he found
  The shining barb appear above the wound,
  Then, with a sigh, that heaved his manly breast,
  The royal brother thus his grief express'd,
  And grasp'd his hand; while all the Greeks around
  With answering sighs return'd the plaintive sound.

  "Oh, dear as life! did I for this agree
  The solemn truce, a fatal truce to thee!
  Wert th Thus, always thus, may Heaven thy life defend!
  Now seek some skilful hand, whose powerful art
  May stanch the effusion, and extract the dart.
  Herald, be swift, and bid Machaon bring
  His speedy succour to the Spartan king;
  Pierced with a winged shaft (the deed of Troy),
  The Grecian's sorrow, and the Dardan's joy."

  With hasty zeal the swift Talthybius flies;
  Through the thick files he darts his searching eyes,
  And finds Machaon, where sublime he stands(132)
  In arms incircled with his native bands.
  Then thus: "Machaon, to the king repair,
  His wounded brother claims thy timely care;
  Pierced by some Lycian or Dardanian bow,
  A grief to us, a triumph to the foe."

  The heavy tidings grieved the godlike man
  Swift to his succour through the ranks he ran.
  The dauntless king yet standing firm he found,
  And all the chiefs in deep concern around.
  Where to the steely point the reed was join'd,
  The shaft he drew, but left the head behind.
  Straight the broad belt with gay embroidery graced,
  He loosed; the corslet from his breast unbraced;
  Then suck'd the blood, and sovereign balm infused,(133)
  Which Chiron gave, and Ćsculapius used.

  While round the prince the Greeks employ their care,
  The Trojans rush tumultuous to the war;
  Once more they glitter in refulgent arms,
  Once more the fields are fill'd with dire alarms.
  Nor had you seen the king of men appear
  Confused, unactive, or surprised with fear;
  But fond of glory, with severe delight,
  His beating bosom claim'd the rising fight.
  No longer with his warlike steeds he stay'd,
  Or press'd the car with polish'd brass inlde, in every toil I share,
  Thy firm associate in the day of war.
  But let the signal be this moment given;
  To mix in fight is all I ask of Heaven.
  The field shall prove how perjuries succeed,
  And chains or death avenge the impious deed."

  Charm'd with this heat, the king his course pursues,
  And next the troops of either Ajax views:
  In one firm orb the bands were ranged around,
  A cloud of heroes blacken'd all the ground.
  Thus from the lofty promontory's brow
  A swain surveys the gathering storm below;
  Slow from the main the heavy vapours rise,
  Spread in dim streams, and sail along the skies,
  Till black as night the swelling tempest shows,
  The cloud condensing as the west-wind blows:
  He dreads the impending storm, and drives his flock
  To the close covert of an arching rock.

  Such, and so thick, the embattled squadrons stood,
  With spears erect, a moving iron wood:
  A shady light was shot from glimmering shields,
  And their brown arms obscured the dusky fields.

  "O heroes! worthy such a dauntless train,
  Whose godlike virtue we but urge in vain,
  (Exclaim'd the king), who raise your eager bands
  With great examples, more than loud commands.
  Ah! would the gods but breathe in all the rest
  Such souls as burn in your exalted breast,
  Soon should our arms with just success be crown'd,
  And Troy's proud walls lie smoking on the ground."

  Then to the next the general bends his course;
  (His heart exults, and glories in his force);
  There reverend Nestor ranks his Pylian bands,
  And with inspiring eloquence commands;
  With strictest order sets his train in arms,
  The chiefs advises, and the soldiers warms.
  Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, round him wait,
  Bias the good, and Pelagon the great.
  The horse and chariots to the front assign'd,
  The foot (the strength of war) he ranged behind;
  The middle space suspected troops supply,
  Inclosed by both, nor left the power to fly;
  He gives command to "curb the fieryhasty ardour thus the chiefs reproved:

  "Can Peleus' son forget a warrior's part.
  And fears Ulysses, skill'd in every art?
  Why stand you distant, and the rest expect
  To mix in combat which yourselves neglect?
  From you 'twas hoped among the first to dare
  The shock of armies, and commence the war;
  For this your names are call'd before the rest,
  To share the pleasures of the genial feast:
  And can you, chiefs! without a blush survey
  Whole troops before you labouring in the fray?
  Say, is it thus those honours you requite?
  The first in banquets, but the last in fight."

  Ulysses heard: the hero's warmth o'erspread
  His cheek with blushes: and severe, he said:
  "Take back the unjust reproach! Behold we stand
  Sheathed in bright arms, and but expect command.
  If glorious deeds afford thy soul delight,
  Behold me plunging in the thickest fight.
  Then give thy warrior-chief a warrior's due,
  Who dares to act whate'er thou dar'st to view."
  Struck with his generous wrath, the king replies:

  "O great in action, and in council wise!
  With ours, thy care and ardour are the same,
  Nor need I to commend, nor aught to blame.
  Sage as thou art, and learn'd in human kind,
  Forgive the transport of a martial mind.
  Haste to the fight, secure of just amends;
  The gods that make, shall keep the worthy, friends."

  He said, and pass'd where great Tydides lay,
  His steeds and chariots wedged in firm array;
  (The warlike Sthenelus attends his side;)(135)
  To whom with stern reproach the monarch cried:
  "O son of Tydeus! (he, whose strength could tame
  The bounding steed, in arms a mighty name)
  Canst thou, remote, the mingling hosts descry,
  With hands unactive, and a careless eye?
  Not thus thy sire the fierce encounter fear'd;
  Still first in front the matchless p join'd promiscuous cries,
  And shrilling shouts and dying groans arise;
  With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed,
  And slaughter'd heroes swell the dreadful tide.

  As torrents roll, increased by numerous rills,
  With rage impetuous, down their echoing hills
  Rush to the vales, and pour'd along the plain.
  Roar through a thousand channels to the main:
  The distant shepherd trembling hears the sound;
  So mix both hosts, and so their cries rebound.

  The bold Antilochus the slaughter led,
  The first who struck a valiant Trojan dead:
  At great Echepolus the lance arrives,
  Razed his high crest, and through his helmet drives;
  Warm'd in the brain the brazen weapon lies,
  And shades eternal settle o'er his eyes.
  So sinks a tower, that long assaults had stood
  Of force and fire, its walls besmear'd with blood.
  Him, the bold leader of the Abantian throng,(140)
  Seized to despoil, and dragg'd the corpse along:
  But while he strove to tug the inserted dart,
  Agenor's javelin reach'd the hero's heart.
  His flank, unguarded by his ample shield,
  Admits the lance: he falls, and spurns the field;
  The nerves, unbraced, support his limbs no more;
  The soul comes floating in a tide of gore.
  Trojans and Greeks now gather round the slain;
  The war renews, the warriors bleed again:
  As o'er their prey rapacious wolves engage,
  Man dies on man, and all is blood and rage.

  In blooming youth fair Simoisius fell,
  Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell;
  Fair Simoisius, whom his mother bore
  Amid the flocks on silver Simois' shore:
  The nymph descending from the hills of Ide,
  To seek her parents on his flowery side,
  Brought forth the babe, their common care and joy,
  And thence from Simois named the lovely boy.
  Short was his date! by dreadful Ajax slain,
  He falls, and renders all their cares in vain!
  So falls a poplar, that in watery ground
  Raised high the head, with stately branches crown'd,
  (Fell'd by some artisnted death:
  His gushing entrails smoked upon the ground,
  And the warm life came issuing from the wound.

  His lance bold Thoas at the conqueror sent,
  Deep in his breast above the pap it went,
  Amid the lungs was fix'd the winged wood,
  And quivering in his heaving bosom stood:
  Till from the dying chief, approaching near,
  The Ćtolian warrior tugg'd his weighty spear:
  Then sudden waved his flaming falchion round,
  And gash'd his belly with a ghastly wound;
  The corpse now breathless on the bloody plain,
  To spoil his arms the victor strove in vain;
  The Thracian bands against the victor press'd,
  A grove of lances glitter'd at his breast.
  Stern Thoas, glaring with revengeful eyes,
  In sullen fury slowly quits the prize.

  Thus fell two heroes; one the pride of Thrace,
  And one the leader of the Epeian race;
  Death's sable shade at once o'ercast their eyes,
  In dust the vanquish'd and the victor lies.
  With copious slaughter all the fields are red,
  And heap'd with growing mountains of the dead.

  Had some brave chief this martial scene beheld,
  By Pallas guarded through the dreadful field;
  Might darts be bid to turn their points away,
  And swords around him innocently play;
  The war's whole art with wonder had he seen,
  And counted heroes where he counted men.

  So fought each host, with thirst of glory fired,
  And crowds on crowds triumphantly expired.

                [Illustration: Map of the Plain of Troy.]

                        Map of the Plain of Troy.





BOOK V.


ARGUMENT.

THE ACTS OF DIOMED.

Diomed, assisted by Pallas, performs wonders in this day's battle.
Pandarus wounds him with an arrow, but the goddess cures him, enables him
to discern gods from mortals, and prohibits him from contending with any
of the former, excepting Venus. Ćneas joins Pandarus to oppose him;
Pandarus is killed, and Ćneas in great danger but for the assistance of
Venus; who, as she is removing her son from the fight,d the spoils of gallant Diomed.

  Struck with amaze and shame, the Trojan crew,
  Or slain, or fled, the sons of Dares view;
  When by the blood-stain'd hand Minerva press'd
  The god of battles, and this speech address'd:

  "Stern power of war! by whom the mighty fall,
  Who bathe in blood, and shake the lofty wall!
  Let the brave chiefs their glorious toils divide;
  And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide:
  While we from interdicted fields retire,
  Nor tempt the wrath of heaven's avenging sire."

  Her words allay the impetuous warrior's heat,
  The god of arms and martial maid retreat;
  Removed from fight, on Xanthus' flowery bounds
  They sat, and listen'd to the dying sounds.

  Meantime, the Greeks the Trojan race pursue,
  And some bold chieftain every leader slew:
  First Odius falls, and bites the bloody sand,
  His death ennobled by Atrides' hand:

  As he to flight his wheeling car address'd,
  The speedy javelin drove from back to breast.
  In dust the mighty Halizonian lay,
  His arms resound, the spirit wings its way.

  Thy fate was next, O Phaestus! doom'd to feel
  The great Idomeneus' protended steel;
  Whom Borus sent (his son and only joy)
  From fruitful Tarne to the fields of Troy.
  The Cretan javelin reach'd him from afar,
  And pierced his shoulder as he mounts his car;
  Back from the car he tumbles to the ground,
  And everlasting shades his eyes surround.

  Then died Scamandrius, expert in the chase,
  In woods and wilds to wound the savage race;
  Diana taught him all her sylvan arts,
  To bend the bow, and aim unerring darts:
  But vainly here Diana's arts he tries,
  The fatal lance arrests him as he flies;
  From Menelaus' arm the weapon sent,
  Through his broad back and heaving bosom went:
  Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound,
  His brazen armour rings against the ground.

  Next artful Phereclus untimely fell;
  Bold Merion sent him to the realms of hell.
  Thy father's skill, O Phereclus! was eets of rain,
  And all the labours of mankind are vain.

  So raged Tydides, boundless in his ire,
  Drove armies back, and made all Troy retire.
  With grief the leader of the Lycian band
  Saw the wide waste of his destructive hand:
  His bended bow against the chief he drew;
  Swift to the mark the thirsty arrow flew,
  Whose forky point the hollow breastplate tore,
  Deep in his shoulder pierced, and drank the gore:
  The rushing stream his brazen armour dyed,
  While the proud archer thus exulting cried:

  "Hither, ye Trojans, hither drive your steeds!
  Lo! by our hand the bravest Grecian bleeds,
  Not long the deathful dart he can sustain;
  Or Phoebus urged me to these fields in vain."
  So spoke he, boastful: but the winged dart
  Stopp'd short of life, and mock'd the shooter's art.
  The wounded chief, behind his car retired,
  The helping hand of Sthenelus required;
  Swift from his seat he leap'd upon the ground,
  And tugg'd the weapon from the gushing wound;
  When thus the king his guardian power address'd,
  The purple current wandering o'er his vest:

  "O progeny of Jove! unconquer'd maid!
  If e'er my godlike sire deserved thy aid,
  If e'er I felt thee in the fighting field;
  Now, goddess, now, thy sacred succour yield.
  O give my lance to reach the Trojan knight,
  Whose arrow wounds the chief thou guard'st in fight;
  And lay the boaster grovelling on the shore,
  That vaunts these eyes shall view the light no more."

  Thus pray'd Tydides, and Minerva heard,
  His nerves confirm'd, his languid spirits cheer'd;
  He feels each limb with wonted vigour light;
  His beating bosom claim'd the promised fight.
  "Be bold, (she cried), in every combat shine,
  War be thy province, thy protection mine;
  Rush to the fight, and every foe control;
  Wake each paternal virtue in thy soul:
  Strength swells thy boiling breast, infused by me,
  And all thy godlike father breathes in thee;
  Yet more, from mortal mists I purge thy eyes,(145)
 as view'd
  The foe prevailing, and his friends pursued;
  Through the thick storm of singing spears he flies,
  Exploring Pandarus with careful eyes.
  At length he found Lycaon's mighty son;
  To whom the chief of Venus' race begun:

  "Where, Pandarus, are all thy honours now,
  Thy winged arrows and unerring bow,
  Thy matchless skill, thy yet unrivall'd fame,
  And boasted glory of the Lycian name?
  O pierce that mortal! if we mortal call
  That wondrous force by which whole armies fall;
  Or god incensed, who quits the distant skies
  To punish Troy for slighted sacrifice;
  (Which, oh avert from our unhappy state!
  For what so dreadful as celestial hate)?
  Whoe'er he be, propitiate Jove with prayer;
  If man, destroy; if god, entreat to spare."

  To him the Lycian: "Whom your eyes behold,
  If right I judge, is Diomed the bold:
  Such coursers whirl him o'er the dusty field,
  So towers his helmet, and so flames his shield.
  If 'tis a god, he wears that chief's disguise:
  Or if that chief, some guardian of the skies,
  Involved in clouds, protects him in the fray,
  And turns unseen the frustrate dart away.
  I wing'd an arrow, which not idly fell,
  The stroke had fix'd him to the gates of hell;
  And, but some god, some angry god withstands,
  His fate was due to these unerring hands.
  Skill'd in the bow, on foot I sought the war,
  Nor join'd swift horses to the rapid car.
  Ten polish'd chariots I possess'd at home,
  And still they grace Lycaon's princely dome:
  There veil'd in spacious coverlets they stand;
  And twice ten coursers wait their lord's command.
  The good old warrior bade me trust to these,
  When first for Troy I sail'd the sacred seas;
  In fields, aloft, the whirling car to guide,
  And through the ranks of death triumphant ride.
  But vain with youth, and yet to thrift inclined,
  I heard his counsels with unheedful mind,
  And thought the steeds (your large suppjhe prize.
  Then fierce Tydides stoops; and from the fields
  Heaved with vast force, a rocky fragment wields.
  Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise,
  Such men as live in these degenerate days:(147)
  He swung it round; and, gathering strength to throw,
  Discharged the ponderous ruin at the foe.
  Where to the hip the inserted thigh unites,
  Full on the bone the pointed marble lights;
  Through both the tendons broke the rugged stone,
  And stripp'd the skin, and crack'd the solid bone.
  Sunk on his knees, and staggering with his pains,
  His falling bulk his bended arm sustains;
  Lost in a dizzy mist the warrior lies;
  A sudden cloud comes swimming o'er his eyes.
  There the brave chief, who mighty numbers sway'd,
  Oppress'd had sunk to death's eternal shade,
  But heavenly Venus, mindful of the love
  She bore Anchises in the Idaean grove,
  His danger views with anguish and despair,
  And guards her offspring with a mother's care.
  About her much-loved son her arms she throws,
  Her arms whose whiteness match the falling snows.
  Screen'd from the foe behind her shining veil,
  The swords wave harmless, and the javelins fail;
  Safe through the rushing horse, and feather'd flight
  Of sounding shafts, she bears him from the fight.

  Nor Sthenelus, with unassisting hands,
  Remain'd unheedful of his lord's commands:
  His panting steeds, removed from out the war,
  He fix'd with straiten'd traces to the car,
  Next, rushing to the Dardan spoil, detains
  The heavenly coursers with the flowing manes:
  These in proud triumph to the fleet convey'd,
  No longer now a Trojan lord obey'd.
  That charge to bold Deipylus he gave,
  (Whom most he loved, as brave men love the brave,)
  Then mounting on his car, resumed the rein,
  And follow'd where Tydides swept the plain.

  Meanwhile (his conquest ravished from his eyes)
  The raging chief in chase of Venus flies:
  No goddess she, commission'd to the field,
  Like Pallas dreadful with hes encounter heaven.
  Stern Mars attentive hears the queen complain,
  And to her hand commits the golden rein;
  She mounts the seat, oppress'd with silent woe,
  Driven by the goddess of the painted bow.
  The lash resounds, the rapid chariot flies,
  And in a moment scales the lofty skies:
  They stopp'd the car, and there the coursers stood,
  Fed by fair Iris with ambrosial food;
  Before her mother, love's bright queen appears,
  O'erwhelmed with anguish, and dissolved in tears:
  She raised her in her arms, beheld her bleed,
  And ask'd what god had wrought this guilty deed?

  [Illustration: VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS.]

          VENUS, WOUNDED IN THE HAND, CONDUCTED BY IRIS TO MARS.


  Then she: "This insult from no god I found,
  An impious mortal gave the daring wound!
  Behold the deed of haughty Diomed!
  'Twas in the son's defence the mother bled.
  The war with Troy no more the Grecians wage;
  But with the gods (the immortal gods) engage."

  Dione then: "Thy wrongs with patience bear,
  And share those griefs inferior powers must share:
  Unnumber'd woes mankind from us sustain,
  And men with woes afflict the gods again.
  The mighty Mars in mortal fetters bound,(149)
  And lodged in brazen dungeons underground,
  Full thirteen moons imprison'd roar'd in vain;
  Otus and Ephialtes held the chain:
  Perhaps had perish'd had not Hermes' care
  Restored the groaning god to upper air.
  Great Juno's self has borne her weight of pain,
  The imperial partner of the heavenly reign;
  Amphitryon's son infix'd the deadly dart,(150)
  And fill'd with anguish her immortal heart.
  E'en hell's grim king Alcides' power confess'd,
  The shaft found entrance in his iron breast;
  To Jove's high palace for a cure he fled,
  Pierced in his own dominions of the dead;
  Where Paeon, sprinkling heavenly balm around,
  Assuaged the glowing pangs, and closed the wound.
  Rash, impious man! to stain the bless'd abodes,
  And drench fires:
  He dreads his fury, and some steps retires.
  Then Phoebus bore the chief of Venus' race
  To Troy's high fane, and to his holy place;
  Latona there and Phoebe heal'd the wound,
  With vigour arm'd him, and with glory crown'd.
  This done, the patron of the silver bow
  A phantom raised, the same in shape and show
  With great Ćneas; such the form he bore,
  And such in fight the radiant arms he wore.
  Around the spectre bloody wars are waged,
  And Greece and Troy with clashing shields engaged.
  Meantime on Ilion's tower Apollo stood,
  And calling Mars, thus urged the raging god:

  "Stern power of arms, by whom the mighty fall;
  Who bathest in blood, and shakest the embattled wall,
  Rise in thy wrath! to hell's abhorr'd abodes
  Despatch yon Greek, and vindicate the gods.
  First rosy Venus felt his brutal rage;
  Me next he charged, and dares all heaven engage:
  The wretch would brave high heaven's immortal sire,
  His triple thunder, and his bolts of fire."

  The god of battle issues on the plain,
  Stirs all the ranks, and fires the Trojan train;
  In form like Acamas, the Thracian guide,
  Enraged to Troy's retiring chiefs he cried:

  "How long, ye sons of Priam! will ye fly,
  And unrevenged see Priam's people die?
  Still unresisted shall the foe destroy,
  And stretch the slaughter to the gates of Troy?
  Lo, brave Ćneas sinks beneath his wound,
  Not godlike Hector more in arms renown'd:
  Haste all, and take the generous warrior's part.
  He said;--new courage swell'd each hero's heart.
  Sarpedon first his ardent soul express'd,
  And, turn'd to Hector, these bold words address'd:

  "Say, chief, is all thy ancient valour lost?
  Where are thy threats, and where thy glorious boast,
  That propp'd alone by Priam's race should stand
  Troy's sacred walls, nor need a foreign hand?
  Now, now thy country calls her wonted friends,
  And the proud vaunt in just derision ends.
  Remote they stand while alien troops engage,
  Likeh his charge, and ardent to fulfil,
  In Troy's h his charge, and ardent to fulfil,
  In Troy's n mix in combat, and their toils renew.

  First, Pylaemenes, great in battle, bled,
  Who sheathed in brass the Paphlagonians led.
  Atrides m Troy, but with the gods ye fight."

  Now near the Greeks the black battalions drew;
  And first two leaders valiant Hector slew:
  His force Anchialus and Mnesthes found,
  In every art of glorious war renown'd;
  In the same car the chiefs to combat ride,
  And fought united, and united died.
  Struck at the sight, the mighty Ajax glows
  With thirst of vengeance, and assaults the foes.
  His massy spear with matchless fury sent,
  Through Amphius' belt and heaving belly went;
  Amphius Apaesus' happy soil possess'd,
  With herds abounding, and with treasure bless'd;
  But fate resistless from his country led
  The chief, to perish at his people's head.
  Shook with his fall his brazen armour rung,
  And fierce, to seize it, conquering Ajax sprung;
  Around his head an iron tempest rain'd;
  A wood of spears his ample shield sustain'd:
  Beneath one foot the yet warm corpse he press'd,
  And drew his javelin from the bleeding breast:
  He could no more; the showering darts denied
  To spoil his glittering arms, and plumy pride.
  Now foes on foes came pouring on the fields,
  With bristling lances, and compacted shields;
  Till in the steely circle straiten'd round,
  Forced he gives way, and sternly quits the ground.

  While thus they strive, Tlepolemus the great,(153)
  Urged by the force of unresisted fate,
  Burns with desire Sarpedon's strength to prove;
  Alcides' offspring meets the son of Jove.
  Sheathed in bright arms each adverse chief came on.
  Jove's great descendant, and his greater son.
  Prepared for combat, ere the lance he toss'd,
  The daring Rhodian vents his haughty boast:

  "What brings this Lycian counsellor so far,
  To tremble at our arms, not mix in war!
  Know thy vain self, nor let their flattery move,
  Who style thee son of cloud-compelling Jove.
  How far unlike those chiefs of race divine,
  How vast the difference of their deeds and thine!
  Jove got such heroes as my sire, whose soul
  No fear could daunt, nor earth nd,
  A fringe of serpents hissing guards the gold:
  Here all the terrors of grim War appear,
  Here rages Force, here tremble Flight and Fear,
  Here storm'd Contention, and here Fury frown'd,
  And the dire orb portentous Gorgon crown'd.
  The massy golden helm she next assumes,
  That dreadful nods with four o'ershading plumes;
  So vast, the broad circumference contains
  A hundred armies on a hundred plains.
  The goddess thus the imperial car ascends;
  Shook by her arm the mighty javelin bends,
  Ponderous and huge; that when her fury burns,
  Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o'erturns.

  Swift at the scourge the ethereal coursers fly,
  While the smooth chariot cuts the liquid sky.
  Heaven's gates spontaneous open to the powers,(155)
  Heaven's golden gates, kept by the winged Hours;(156)
  Commission'd in alternate watch they stand,
  The sun's bright portals and the skies command,
  Involve in clouds the eternal gates of day,
  Or the dark barrier roll with ease away.
  The sounding hinges ring on either side
  The gloomy volumes, pierced with light, divide.
  The chariot mounts, where deep in ambient skies,
  Confused, Olympus' hundred heads arise;
  Where far apart the Thunderer fills his throne,
  O'er all the gods superior and alone.
  There with her snowy hand the queen restrains
  The fiery steeds, and thus to Jove complains:

  "O sire! can no resentment touch thy soul?
  Can Mars rebel, and does no thunder roll?
  What lawless rage on yon forbidden plain,
  What rash destruction! and what heroes slain!
  Venus, and Phoebus with the dreadful bow,
  Smile on the slaughter, and enjoy my woe.
  Mad, furious power! whose unrelenting mind
  No god can govern, and no justice bind.
  Say, mighty father! shall we scourge this pride,
  And drive from fight the impetuous homicide?"

  To whom assenting, thus the Thunderer said:
  "Go! and the great Minerva be thy aid.
  To tame the monster-god Minerva ke his coursers, thus her silence broke:

  "Degenerate prince! and not of Tydeus' kind,
  Whose little body lodged a mighty mind;
  Foremost he press'd in glorious toils to share,
  And scarce refrain'd when I forbade the war.
  Alone, unguarded, once he dared to go,
  And feast, incircled by the Theban foe;
  There braved, and vanquish'd, many a hardy knight;
  Such nerves I gave him, and such force in fight.
  Thou too no less hast been my constant care;
  Thy hands I arm'd, and sent thee forth to war:
  But thee or fear deters, or sloth detains;
  No drop of all thy father warms thy veins."

  The chief thus answered mild: "Immortal maid!
  I own thy presence, and confess thy aid.
  Not fear, thou know'st, withholds me from the plains,
  Nor sloth hath seized me, but thy word restrains:
  From warring gods thou bad'st me turn my spear,
  And Venus only found resistance here.
  Hence, goddess! heedful of thy high commands,
  Loth I gave way, and warn'd our Argive bands:
  For Mars, the homicide, these eyes beheld,
  With slaughter red, and raging round the field."

  Then thus Minerva:--"Brave Tydides, hear!
  Not Mars himself, nor aught immortal, fear.
  Full on the god impel thy foaming horse:
  Pallas commands, and Pallas lends thee force.
  Rash, furious, blind, from these to those he flies,
  And every side of wavering combat tries;
  Large promise makes, and breaks the promise made:
  Now gives the Grecians, now the Trojans aid."(159)

  She said, and to the steeds approaching near,
  Drew from his seat the martial charioteer.
  The vigorous power the trembling car ascends,
  Fierce for revenge; and Diomed attends:
  The groaning axle bent beneath the load;
  So great a hero, and so great a god.
  She snatch'd the reins, she lash'd with all her force,
  And full on Mars impelled the foaming horse:
  But first, to hide her heavenly visage, spread
  Black Orcus' helmet o'er her radiant head.

            [Illustration: DIOMED CASTING HIS SPEAR AT MARd with lightning, hadst thou hence been thrown,
  Where chain'd on burning rocks the Titans groan."

  Thus he who shakes Olympus with his nod;
  Then gave to Paeon's care the bleeding god.(160)
  With gentle hand the balm he pour'd around,
  And heal'd the immortal flesh, and closed the wound.
  As when the fig's press'd juice, infused in cream,
  To curds coagulates the liquid stream,
  Sudden the fluids fix the parts combined;
  Such, and so soon, the ethereal texture join'd.
  Cleansed from the dust and gore, fair Hebe dress'd
  His mighty limbs in an immortal vest.
  Glorious he sat, in majesty restored,
  Fast by the throne of heaven's superior lord.
  Juno and Pallas mount the bless'd abodes,
  Their task perform'd, and mix among the gods.

                          [Illustration: JUNO.]

                                  JUNO.





BOOK VI.


ARGUMENT.

THE EPISODES OF GLAUCUS AND DIOMED, AND OF HECTOR AND ANDROMACHE.

The gods having left the field, the Grecians prevail. Helenus, the chief
augur of Troy, commands Hector to return to the city, in order to appoint
a solemn procession of the queen and the Trojan matrons to the temple of
Minerva, to entreat her to remove Diomed from the fight. The battle
relaxing during the absence of Hector, Glaucus and Diomed have an
interview between the two armies; where, coming to the knowledge, of the
friendship and hospitality passed between their ancestors, they make
exchange of their arms. Hector, having performed the orders of Helenus,
prevails upon Paris to return to the battle, and, taking a tender leave of
his wife Andromache, hastens again to the field.

The scene is first in the field of ld."

  He said: compassion touch'd the hero's heart
  He stood, suspended with the lifted dart:
  As pity pleaded for his vanquish'd prize,
  Stern Agamemnon swift to vengeance flies,
  And, furious, thus: "Oh impotent of mind!(164)
  Shall these, shall these Atrides' mercy find?
  Well hast thou known proud Troy's perfidious land,
  And well her natives merit at thy hand!
  Not one of all the race, nor sex, nor age,
  Shall save a Trojan from our boundless rage:
  Ilion shall perish whole, and bury all;
  Her babes, her infants at the breast, shall fall;(165)
  A dreadful lesson of exampled fate,
  To warn the nations, and to curb the great!"

  The monarch spoke; the words, with warmth address'd,
  To rigid justice steel'd his brother's breast
  Fierce from his knees the hapless chief he thrust;
  The monarch's javelin stretch'd him in the dust,
  Then pressing with his foot his panting heart,
  Forth from the slain he tugg'd the reeking dart.
  Old Nestor saw, and roused the warrior's rage;
  "Thus, heroes! thus the vigorous combat wage;
  No son of Mars descend, for servile gains,
  To touch the booty, while a foe remains.
  Behold yon glittering host, your future spoil!
  First gain the conquest, then reward the toil."

  And now had Greece eternal fame acquired,
  And frighted Troy within her walls, retired,
  Had not sage Helenus her state redress'd,
  Taught by the gods that moved his sacred breast.
  Where Hector stood, with great Ćneas join'd,
  The seer reveal'd the counsels of his tions send to war!
  Be mindful of the strength your fathers bore;
  Be still yourselves, and Hector asks no more.
  One hour demands me in the Trojan wall,
  To bid our altars flame, and victims fall:
  Nor shall, I trust, the matrons' holy train,
  And reverend elders, seek the gods in vain."

  This said, with ample strides the hero pass'd;
  The shield's large orb behind his shoulder cast,
  His neck o'ershading, to his ankle hung;
  And as he march'd the brazen buckler rung.

  Now paused the battle (godlike Hector gone),(167)
  Where daring Glaucus and great Tydeus' son
  Between both armies met: the chiefs from far
  Observed each other, and had mark'd for war.
  Near as they drew, Tydides thus began:

  "What art thou, boldest of the race of man?
  Our eyes till now that aspect ne'er beheld,
  Where fame is reap'd amid the embattled field;
  Yet far before the troops thou dar'st appear,
  And meet a lance the fiercest heroes fear.
  Unhappy they, and born of luckless sires,
  Who tempt our fury when Minerva fires!
  But if from heavennd.
  Then mighty Praetus Argos' sceptre sway'd,
  Whose hard commands Bellerophon obey'd.
  With direful jealousy the monarch raged,
  And the brave prince in numerous toils engaged.
  For him Antaea burn'd with lawless flame,
  And strove to tempt him from the paths of fame:
  In vain she tempted the relentless youth,
  Endued with wisdom, sacred fear, and truth.
  Fired at his scorn the queen to Praetus fled,
  And begg'd revenge for her insulted bed:
  Incensed he heard, resolving on his fate;
  But hospitable laws restrain'd his hate:
  To Lycia the devoted youth he sent,
  With tablets seal'd, that told his dire intent.(168)
  Now bless'd by every power who guards the good,
  The chief arrived at Xanthus' silver flood:
  There Lycia's monarch paid him honours due,
  Nine days he feasted, and nine bulls he slew.
  But when the tenth bright morning orient glow'd,
  The faithful youth his monarch's mandate show'd:
  The fatal tablets, till that instant seal'd,
  The deathful secret to the king reveal'd.
  First, dire Chimaera's conquest was enjoin'd;
  A mingled monster of no mortal kind!
  Behind, a dragon's fiery tail was spread;
  A goat's rough body bore a lion's head;
  Her pitchy nostrils flaky flames expire;
  Her gaping throat emits infernal fire.

  "This pest he slaughter'd, (for he read the skies,
  And trusted heaven's informing prodigies,)
  Then met in arms the Solymaean crew,(169)
  (Fiercest of men,) and those the warrior slew;
  Next the bold Amazons' whole force defied;
  And conquer'd still, for heaven was on his side.

  "Nor ended here his toils: his Lycian foes,
  At his return, a treacherous ambush rose,
  With levell'd spears along the winding shore:
  There fell they breathless, and return'd no more.

  "At length the monarch, with repentant grief,
  Confess'd the gods, and god-descended chief;
  His daughter gave, the stranger to detain,
  With half the honours of his ample reign:
  The Lycians grant a chosen space of ground,
full harvest of yon ample field;
  Enough of Greeks shall dye thy spear with gore;
  But thou and Diomed be foes no more.
  Now change we arms, and prove to either host
  We guard the friendship of the line we boast."

  Thus having said, the gallant chiefs alight,
  Their hands they join, their mutual faith they plight;
  Brave Glaucus then each narrow thought resign'd,
  (Jove warm'd his bosom, and enlarged his mind,)
  For Diomed's brass arms, of mean device,
  For which nine oxen paid, (a vulgar price,)
  He gave his own, of gold divinely wrought,(171)
  A hundred beeves the shining purchase bought.

  Meantiours in Minerva's fane.
  The largest mantle your full wardrobes hold,
  Most prized for art, and labour'd o'er with gold,
  Before the goddess' honour'd knees be spread,
  And twelve young heifers to her altar led.
  So may the power, atoned by fervent prayer,
  Our wives, our infants, and our city spare;
  And far avert Tydides' wasteful ire,
  Who mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire.
  Be this, O mother, your religious care:
  I go to rouse soft Paris to the war;
  If yet not lost to all the sense of shame,
  The recreant warrior hear the voice of fame.
  Oh, would kind earth the hateful wretch embrace,
  That pest of Troy, that ruin of our race!(174)
  Deep to the dark abyss might he descend,
  Troy yet should flourish, and my sorrows end."

  This heard, she gave command: and summon'd came
  Each noble matron and illustrious dame.
  The Phrygian queen to her rich wardrobe went,
  Where treasured odours breathed a costly scent.
  There lay the vestures of no vulgar art,
  Sidonian maids embroider'd every part,
  Whom from soft Sidon youthful Paris bore,
  With Helen touching on the Tyrian shore.
  Here, as the queen revolved with careful eyes
  The various textures and the various dyes,
  She chose a veil that shone superior far,
  And glow'd refulgent as the morning star.
  Herself with this the long procession leads;
  The train majestically slow proceeds.
  Soon as to Ilion's topmost tower they come,
  And awful reach the high Palladian dome,
  Antenor's consort, fair Theano, waits
  As Pallas' priestess, and unbars the gates.
  With hands uplifted and imploring eyes,
  They fill the dome with supplicating cries.
  The priestess then the shining veil displays,
  Placed on Minerva's knees, and thus she prays:

  "Oh awful goddess! ever-dreadful maid,
  Troy's strong defence, unconquer'd Pallas, aid!
  Break thou Tydides' spear, and let him fall
  Prone on the dust before the Trojan wall!
  So twelve young heifers, guiltless of the yoke,
  Shht in vain;
  She, with one maid of all her menial train,
  Had hence retired; and with her second joy,
  The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy,
  Pensive she stood on Ilion's towery height,
  Beheld the war, and sicken'd at the sight;
  There her sad eyes in vain her lord explore,
  Or weep the wounds her bleeding country bore.

  But he who found not whom his soul desired,
  Whose virtue charm'd him as her beauty fired,
  Stood in the gates, and ask'd "what way she bent
  Her parting step? If to the fane she went,
  Where late the mourning matrons made resort;
  Or sought her sisters in the Trojan court?"
  "Not to the court, (replied the attendant train,)
  Nor mix'd with matrons to Minerva's fane:
  To Ilion's steepy tower she bent her way,
  To mark the fortunes of the doubtful day.
  Troy fled, she heard, before the Grecian sword;
  She heard, and trembled for her absent lord:
  Distracted with surprise, she seem'd to fly,
  Fear on her cheek, and sorrow m her eye.
  The nurse attended with her infant boy,
  The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy."

  Hector this heard, return'd without delay;
  Swift through the town he trod his former way,
  Through streets of palaces, and walks of state;
  And met the mourner at the Scaean gate.
  With haste to meet him sprung the joyful fair.
  His blameless wife, Aetion's wealthy heir:
  (Cilician Thebe great Aetion sway'd,
  And Hippoplacus' wide extended shade:)
  The nurse stood near, in whose embraces press'd,
  His only hope hung smiling at her breast,
  Whom each soft charm and early grace adorn,
  Fair as the new-born star that gilds the morn.
  To this loved infant Hector gave the name
  Scamandrius, from Scamander's honour'd stream;
  Astyanax the Trojans call'd the boy,
  From his great father, the defence of Troy.
  Silent the warrior smiled, and pleased resign'd
  To tender passions all his mighty mind;
  His beauteous princess cast a mournful look,
  Hung on his hand, and then dejected spoke;
  Her boshan he?
  For sure such courage length of life denies,
  And thou must fall, thy virtue's sacrifice.
  Greece in her single heroes strove in vain;
  Now hosts oppose thee, and thou must be slain.
  O grant me, gods, ere Hector meets his doom,
  All I can ask of heaven, an early tomb!
  So shall my days in one sad tenor run,
  And end with sorrows as they first begun.
  No parent now remains my griefs to share,
  No father's aid, no mother's tender care.
  The fierce Achilles wrapt our walls in fire,
  Laid Thebe waste, and slew my warlike sire!
  His fate compassion in the victor bred;
  Stern as he was, he yet revered the dead,
  His radiant arms preserved from hostile spoil,
  And laid him decent on the funeral pile;
  Then raised a mountain where his bones were burn'd,
  The mountain-nymphs the rural tomb adorn'd,
  Jove's sylvan daughters bade their elms bestow
  A barren shade, and in his honour grow.

  "By the same arm my seven brave brothers fell;
  In one sad day beheld the gates of hell;
  While the fat herds and snowy flocks they fed,
  Amid their fields the hapless heroes bled!
  My mother lived to wear the victor's bands,
  The queen of Hippoplacia's sylvan lands:
  Redeem'd too late, she scarce beheld again
  Her pleasing empire and her native plain,
  When ah! oppress'd by life-consuming woe,
  She fell a victim to Diana's bow.

  "Yet while my Hector still survives, I see
  My father, mother, brethren, all, in thee:
  Alas! my parents, brothers, kindred, all
  Once more will perish, if my Hector fall,
  Thy wife, thy infant, in thy danger share:
  Oh, prove a husband's and a father's care!
  That quarter most the skilful Greeks annoy,
  Where yon wild fig-trees join the wall of Troy;
  Thou, from this tower defend the important post;
 owers! protect my son!
  Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown,
  To guard the Trojans, to defend the crown,
  Against his country's foes the war to wage,
  And rise the Hector of the future age!
  So when triumphant from successful toils
  Of heroes slain he bears the reeking spoils,
  Whole hosts may hail him with deserved acclaim,
  And say, 'This chief transcends his father's fame:'
  While pleased amidst the general shouts of Troy,
  His mother's conscious heart o'erflows with joy."

  He spoke, and fondly gazing on her charms,
  Restored the pleasing burden to her arms;
  Soft on her fragrant breast the babe she laid,
  Hush'd to repose, and with a smile survey'd.
  The troubled pleasure soon chastised by fear,
  She mingled with a smile a tender tear.
  The soften'd chief with kind compassion view'd,
  And dried the falling drops, and thus pursued:

  "Andromache! my soul's far better part,
  Why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart?
  No hostile hand can antedate my doom,
  Till fate condemns me to the silent tomb.
  Fix'd is the term to all the race of earth;
  And such the hard condition of our birth:
  No force can then resist, no flight can save,
  All sink alike, the fearful and the brave.
  No more--but hasten to thy tasks at home,
  There guide the spindle, and direct the loom:
  Me glory summons to the martial scene,
  The field of combat is the sphere for men.
  Where heroes war, the foremost place I claim,
  The first in danger as the first in fame."

  Thus having said, the glorious chief resumes
  His towery helmet, black with shading plumes.
  His princess parts with a prophetic sigh,
  Unwilling parts, and oft reverts her eye
  That stream'd at every look; then, moving slow,
  Sought her own palace, and indulged her woe.
  There, while her tears deplored the godlike man,
  Through all her train the soft infection ran;
  The pious maids their mingled sorrows shed,
  And mourn the living Hector, as the dead.

  But now, no longXALgement for that day, and incite Hector to challenge the Greeks to a
single combat. Nine of the princes accepting the challenge, the lot is
cast and falls upon Ajax. These heroes, after several attacks, are parted
by the night. The Trojans calling a council, Antenor purposes the delivery
of Helen to the Greeks, to which Paris will not consent, but offers to
restore them her riches. Priam sends a herald to make this offer, and to
demand a truce for burning the dead, the last of which only is agreed to
by Agamemnon. When the funerals are performed, the Greeks, pursuant to the
advice of Nestor, erect a fortification to protect their fleet and camp,
flanked with towers, and defended by a ditch and palisades. Neptune
testifies his jealousy at this work, but is pacified by a promise from
Jupiter. Both armies pass the night in feasting but Jupiter disheartens
the Trojans with thunder, and other signs of his wrath.

The three and twentieth day ends with the duel of Hector and Ajax, the
next day the truce is agreed; another is taken up in the funeral rites of
the slain and one more in building the fortification before the ships. So
that somewhat about three days is employed in this book. The scene lies
wholly in the field.

  So spoke the guardian of the Trojan state,
  Then rush'd impetuous through the Scaean gate.
  Him Paris follow'd to the dire alarms;
  Both breathing slaughter, both resolved in arms.
  As when to sailors labouring through the main,
  That long have heaved the weary oar in vain,
  Jove bids at length the expected gales arise;
  The gales blow grateful, and the vessel flies.
  So welcome these to Troy's desiring train,
  The bands are cheer'd, the war awakes again.

  Bold Paris first the work of death begun
  On great Menestheus, Areithous' son,
  Sprung from the fair Philomeda's embrace,
  The pleasing Arne was his native place.
  Then sunk Eioneus to the shades below,
  Beneath his steely casque he felt the blow(177)
  Full on his neck, from Hector's y soul prompts, and what some god commands.
  Great Jove, averse our warfare to compose,
  O'erwhelms the nations with new toils and woes;
  War with a fiercer tide once more returns,
  Till Ilion falls, or till yon navy burns.
  You then, O princes of the Greeks! appear;
  'Tis Hector speaks, and calls the gods to hear:
  From all your troops select the boldest knight,
  And him, the boldest, Hector dares to fight.
  Here if I fall, by chance of battle slain,
  Be his my spoil, and his these arms remain;
  But let my body, to my friends return'd,
  By Trojan hands and Trojan flames be burn'd.
  And if Apollo, in whose aid I trust,
 e doubtful honour might forego,
  So great the danger, and so brave the foe."

  He said, and turn'd his brother's vengeful mind;
  He stoop'd to reason, and his rage resign'd,
  No longer bent to rush on certain harms;
  His joyful friends unbrace his azure arms.

  He from whose lips divine persuasion flows,
  Grave Nestor, then, in graceful act arose;
  Thus to the kings he spoke: "What grief, what shame
  Attend on Greece, and all the Grecian name!
  How shall, alas! her hoary heroes mourn
  Their sons degenerate, and their race a scorn!
  What tears shall down thy silvery beard be roll'd,
  O Peleus, old in arms, in wisdom old!
  Once with what joy the generous prince would hear
  Of every chief who fought this glorious war,
  Participate their fame, and pleased inquire
  Each name, each action, and each hero's sire!
  Gods! should he see our warriors trembling stand,
  And trembling all before one hostile hand;
  How would he lift his aged arms on high,
  Lament inglorious Greece, and beg to die!
  Oh! would to all the immortal powers above,
  Minerva, Phoebus, and almighty Jove!
  Years might again roll back, my youth renew,
  And give this arm the spring which once it knew
  When fierce in war, where Jardan's waters fall,
  I led my troops to Phea's trembling wall,
  And with the Arcadian spears my prowess tried,
  Where Celadon rolls down his rapid tide.(179)
  There Ereuthalion braved us in the field,
  Proud Areithous' dreadful arms to wield;
  Great Areithous, known from shore to shore
  By the huge, knotted, iron mace he bore;
  No lance he shook, nor bent the twanging bow,
  But broke, with this, the battle of the foe.
  Him not by manly force Lycurgus slew,
  Whose guileful javelin from the thicket flew,
  Deep in a winding way his breast assailed,
  Nor aught the warrior's thundering mace avail'd.
  Supine he fell: those arms which Mars before
  Had given the vanquish'd, now the victor bore:
  But when old age had dimm'd Lycurgus' eyes,
  Toreast:
  'Twas vain to seek retreat, and vain to fear;
  Himself had challenged, and the foe drew near.

  Stern Telamon behind his ample shield,
  As from a brazen tower, o'erlook'd the field.
  Huge was its orb, with seven thick folds o'ercast,
  Of tough bull-hides; of solid brass the last,
  (The work of Tychius, who in Hyle dwell'd
  And in all arts of armoury excell'd,)
  This Ajax bore before his manly breast,
  And, threatening, thus his adverse chief address'd:

  "Hector! approach my arm, and singly know
  What strength thou hast, and what the Grecian foe.
  Achilles shuns the fight; yet some there are,
  Not void of soul, and not unskill'd in war:
  Let him, unactive on the sea-beat shore,
  Indulge his wrath, and aid our arms no more;
  Whole troops of heroes Greece has yet to boast,
  And sends thee one, a sample of her host,
  Such as I am, I come to prove thy might;
  No more--be sudden, and begin the fight."

  "O son of Telamon, thy country's pride!
  (To Ajax thus the Trojan prince replied)
  Me, as a boy, or woman, wouldst thou fright,
  New to the field, and trembling at the fight?
  Thou meet'st a chief deserving of thy arms,
  To combat born, and bred amidst alarms:
  I know to shift my ground, remount the car,
  Turn, charge, and answer every call of war;
  To right, to left, the dexterous lance I wield,
  And bear thick battle on my sounding shield
  But open be our fight, and bold each blow;
  I steal no conquest from a noble foe."

  He said, and rising, high above the field
  Whirl'd the long lance against the sevenfold shield.
  Full on the brass descending from above
  Through six bull-hides the furious weapon drove,
  Till in the seventh it fix'd. Then Ajax threw;
  Through Hector's shield the forceful javelin flew,
  His corslet enters, and his garment rends,
  And glancing downwards, near his flank descends.
  The wary Trojan shrinks, and bending low
  Beneath his buckler, disappoints the blow.
  From their bored shields threeks, give ear!
  The words of Troy, and Troy's great monarch, hear.
  Pleased may ye hear (so heaven succeed my prayers)
  What Paris, author of the war, declares.
  The spoils and treasures he to Ilion bore
  (Oh had he perish'd ere they touch'd our shore!)
  He proffers injured Greece: with large increase
  Of added Trojan wealth to buy the peace.
  But to restore the beauteous bride again,
  This Greece demands, and Troy requests in vain.
  Next, O ye chiefs! we ask a truce to burn
  Our slaughter'd heroes, and their bones inurn.
  That done, once more the fate of war be tried,
  And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!"

  The Greeks gave ear, but none the silence broke;
  At length Tydides rose, and rising spoke:
  "Oh, take not, friends! defrauded of your fame,
  Their proffer'd wealth, nor even the Spartan dame.
  Let conquest make them ours: fate shakes their wall,
  And Troy already totters to her fall."

  The admiring chiefs, and all the Grecian name,
  With general shouts return'd him loud acclaim.
  Then thus the king of kings rejects the peace:
  "Herald! in him thou hear'st the voice of Greece
  For what remains; let funeral flames be fed
  With heroes' corps: I war not with the dead:
  Go search your slaughtered chiefs on yonder plain,
  And gratify the manes of the slain.
  Be witness, Jove, whose thunder rolls on high!"
  He said, and rear'd his sceptre to the sky.

  To sacred Troy, where all her princes lay
  To wait the event, the herald bent his way.
  He came, and standing in the midst, explain'd
  The peace rejected, but the truce obtain'd.
  Straight to their several cares the Trojans move,
  Some search the plains, some fell the sounding grove:
  Nor less the Greeks, descending on the shore,
  Hew'd the green forests, and the bodies bore.
  And now from forth the chambers of the main,
  To shed his sacred light on earth again,
  Arose the golden chariot of the day,
  And tipp'd the mountains with a purple ray.
  In mingled thrs, whom Hypsipyle of yore
  To Jason, shepherd of his people, bore,)
  The rest they purchased at their proper cost,
  And well the plenteous freight supplied the host:
  Each, in exchange, proportion'd treasures gave;(188)
  Some, brass or iron; some, an ox, or slave.
  All night they feast, the Greek and Trojan powers:
  Those on the fields, and these within their towers.
  But Jove averse the signs of wrath display'd,
  And shot red lightnings through the gloomy shade:
  Humbled they stood; pale horror seized on all,
  While the deep thunder shook the aerial hall.
  Each pour'd to Jove before the bowl was crown'd;
  And large libations drench'd the thirsty ground:
  Then late, refresh'd with sleep from toils of fight,
  Enjoy'd the balmy blessings of the night.

               [Illustration: GREEK AMPHORA--WINE VESSELS.]

                       GREEK AMPHORA--WINE VESSELS.





BOOK VIII.


ARGUMENT.

THE SECOND BATTLE, AND THE DISTRESS OF THE GREEKS.

Jupiter assembles a council of the deities, and threatens them with the
pains of Tartarus if they assist either side: Minerva only obtains of him
that she may direct the Greeks by her counsels.(189) his balances the
fates of both, and affrights the Greeks with his thunders and lightnings.
Nestor alone continues in the field in great danger: Diomed relieves him;
whose exploits, and those of Hector, are excellently described. Juno
endeavours to animate Neptune to the assistance of the Greeks, but in
vain. The acts of Teucer, who is at length wounded by Hector, and carried
off. Juno and Minerva prepare to aid the Grecians, but are restrained by
Iris, sent from Jupiter. The night puts an end to the battle. Hector
continues in the field, (the Greeks being driven to their fortifications
before the ships,) and gives orders to keep the watch all night in the
camp, to prevent the enemy from re-embarking and escaping by flight. They
kindle fires throug altar blazed:
  There, from his radiant car, the sacred sire
  Of gods and men released the steeds of fire:
  Blue ambient mists the immortal steeds embraced;
  High on the cloudy point his seat he placed;
  Thence his broad eye the subject world surveys,
  The town, and tents, and navigable seas.

  Now had the Grecians snatch'd a short repast,
  And buckled on their shining arms with haste.
  Troy roused as soon; for on this dreadful day
  The fate of fathers, wives, and infants lay.
  The gates unfolding pour forth all their train;
  Squadrons on squadrons cloud the dusky plain:
  Men, steeds, and chariots shake the trembling ground,
  The tumult thickens, and the skies resound;
  And now with shouts the shocking armies closed,
  To lances lances, shields to shields opposed,
  Host against host with shadowy legends drew,
  The sounding darts in iron tempests flew;
  Victors and vanquish'd join promiscuous cries,
  Triumphant shouts and dying groans arise;
  With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed,
  And slaughter'd heroes swell the dreadful tide.
  Long as the morning beams, increasing bright,
  O'er heaven's clear azure spread the sacred light,
  Commutual death the fate of war confounds,
  Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
  But when the sun the height of heaven ascends,
  The sire of gods his golden scales suspends,(192)
  With equal hand: in these explored the fate
  Of Greece and Troy, and poised the mighty weight:
  Press'd with its load, the Grecian balance lies
  Low sunk on earth, the Trojan strikes the skies.
  Then Jove from Ida's top his horrors spreads;
  The clouds burst dreadful o'er the Grecian heads;
  Thick lightnings flash; the muttering thunder rolls;
  Their strength he withers, and unmans their souls.
  Before his wrath the trembling hosts retire;
  The gods in terrors, and the skies on fire.
  Nor great Idomeneus that sight could bear,
  Nor each stern Ajax, thunderbolts of war:
  Nor he, the king of war, the alae left, their trusty servants hold;
  Eurymedon, and Sthenelus the bold:
  The reverend charioteer directs the course,
  And strains his aged arm to lash the horse.
  Hector they face; unknowing how to fear,
  Fierce he drove on; Tydides whirl'd his spear.
  The spear with erring haste mistook its way,
  But plunged in Eniopeus' bosom lay.
  His opening hand in death forsakes the rein;
  The steeds fly back: he falls, and spurns the plain.
  Great Hector sorrows for his servant kill'd,
  Yet unrevenged permits to press the field;
  Till, to supply his place and rule the car,
  Rose Archeptolemus, the fierce in war.
  And now had death and horror cover'd all;(193)
  Like timorous flocks the Trojans in their wall
  Inclosed had bled: but Jove with awful sound
  Roll'd the big thunder o'er the vast profound:
  Full in Tydides' face the lightning flew;
  The ground before him flamed with sulphur blue;
  The quivering steeds fell prostrate at the sight;
  And Nestor's trembling hand confess'd his fright:
  He dropp'd the reins: and, shook with sacred dread,
  Thus, turning, warn'd the intrepid Diomed:

  "O chief! too daring in thy friend's defence
  Retire advHector braves the warrior as he flies.
  "Go, mighty hero! graced above the rest
  In seats of council and the sumptuous feast:
  Now hope no more those honours from thy train;
  Go less than woman, in the form of man!
  To scale our walls, to wrap our towers in flames,
  To lead in exile the fair Phrygian dames,
  Thy once proud hopes, presumptuous prince! are fled;
  This arm shall reach thy heart, and stretch thee dead."

  Now fears dissuade him, and now hopes invite.
  To stop his coursers, and to stand the fight;
  Thrice turn'd the chief, and thrice imperial Jove
  On Ida's summits thunder'd from above.
  Great Hector heard; he saw the flashing light,
  (The sign of conquest,) and thus urged the fight:

  "Hear, every Trojan, Lycian, Dardan band,
  All famed in war, and dreadful hand to hand.
  Be mindful of the wreaths your arms have won,
  Your great forefathers' glories, and your own.
  Heard ye the voice of Jove? Success and fame
  Await on Troy, on Greece eternal shame.
  In vain they skulk behind their boasted wall,
  Weak bulwarks; destined by this arm to fall.
  High o'er their slighted trench our steeds shall bound,
  And pass victorious o'er the levell'd mound.
  Soon as before yon hollow ships we stand,
  Fight each with flames, and toss the blazing brand;
  Till, their proud navy wrapt in smoke and fires,
  All Greece, encompass'd, in one blaze expires."

  Furious he said; then bending o'er the yoke,
  Encouraged his proud steeds, while thus he spoke:

  "Now, Xanthus, Ćthon, Lampus, urge the chase,
  And thou, Podargus! prove thy generous race;
  Be fleet, be fearless, this important day,
  And all your master's well-spent care repay.
  For this, high-fed, in plenteous stalls ye stand,
  Served with pure wheat, and by a princess' hand;
  For this my spouse, of great Aetion's line,
  So oft has steep'd the strengthening grain in wine.
  Now swift pursue, now thunder uncontroll'd:
  Give me to seize rich Nestor's shield of gold;
  From Thero dares a hundred foes,
  While the feast lasts, and while the goblet flows;
  But who to meet one martial man is found,
  When the fight rages, and the flames surround?
  O mighty Jove! O sire of the distress'd!
  Was ever king like me, like me oppress'd?
  With power immense, with justice arm'd in vain;
  My glory ravish'd, and my people slain!
  To thee my vows were breathed from every shore;
  What altar smoked not with our victims' gore?
  With fat of bulls I fed the constant flame,
  And ask'd destruction to the Trojan name.
  Now, gracious god! far humbler our demand;
  Give these at least to 'scape from Hector's hand,
  And save the relics of the Grecian land!"

  Thus pray'd the king, and heaven's great father heard
  His vows, in bitterness of soul preferr'd:
  The wrath appeased, by happy signs declares,
  And gives the people to their monarch's prayers.
  His eagle, sacred bird of heaven! he sent,
  A fawn his talons truss'd, (divine portent!)
  High o'er the wondering hosts he soar'd above,
  Who paid their vows to Panomphaean Jove;
  Then let the prey before his altar fall;
  The Greeks beheld, and transport seized on all:
  Encouraged by the sign, the troops revive,
  And fierce on Troy with doubled fury drive.
  Tydides first, of all the Grecian force,
  O'er the broad ditch impell'd his foaming horse,
  Pierced the deep ranks, their strongest battle tore,
  And dyed his javelin red with Trojan gore.
  Young Agelaus (Phradmon was his sire)
  With flying coursers shunn'd his dreadful ire;
  Struck through the back, the Phrygian fell oppress'd;
  The dart drove on, and issued at his breast:
  Headlong he quits the car: his arms resound;
  His ponderous buckler thunders on the ground.
  Forth rush a tide of Greeks, the passage freed;
  The Atridae first, the Ajaces next succeed:
  Meriones, like Mars in arms renown'd,
  And godlike Idomen, now passed the mound;
  Evaemon's son next issues to the foe,
  And last young Teucer with his bended bowcture knits the channel bone,
  The furious chief discharged the craggy stone:
  The bow-string burst beneath the ponderous blow,
  And his numb'd hand dismiss'd his useless bow.
  He fell: but Ajax his broad shield display'd,
  And screen'd his brother with the mighty shade;
  Till great Alaster, and Mecistheus, bore
  The batter'd archer groaning to the shore.

  Troy yet found grace before the Olympian sire,
  He arm'd their hands, and fill'd their breasts with fire.
  The Greeks repulsed, retreat behind their wall,
  Or in the trench on heaps confusedly fall.
  First of the foe, great Hector march'd along,
  With terror clothed, and more than mortal strong.
  As the bold hound, that gives the lion chase,
  With beating bosom, and with eager pace,
  Hangs on his haunch, or fastens on his heels,
  Guards as he turns, and circles as he wheels;
  Thus oft the Grecians turn'd, but still they flew;
  Thus following, Hector still the hindmost slew.
  When flying they had pass'd the trench profound,
  And many a chief lay gasping on the ground;
  Before the ships a desperate stand they made,
  And fired the troops, and called the gods to aid.
  Fierce on his rattling chariot Hector came:
  His eyes like Gorgon shot a sanguine flame
  That wither'd all their host: like Mars he stood:
  Dire as the monster, dreadful as the god!
  Their strong distress the wife of Jove survey'd;
  Then pensive thus, to war's triumphant maid:

  "O daughter of that god, whose arm can wield
  The avenging bolt, and shake the sable shield!
  Now, in this moment of her last despair,
  Shall wretched Greece no more confess our care,
  Condemn'd to suffer the full force of fate,
  And drain the dregs of heaven's relentless hate?
  Gods! shall one raging hand thus level all?
  What numbers fell! what numbers yet shall fall!
  What power divine shall Hector's wrath assuage?
  Still swells the slaughter, and still grows the rage!"

  So spake the imperial regent of the skies;
  To whom the  car in fragments scatter'd o'er the sky;
  Yourselves condemn'd ten rolling years to weep
  The wounds impress'd by burning thunder deep.
  So shall d, they rest in high celestial stalls;
  The chariot propp'd against the crystal walls,
  The pensive goddesses, abash'd, controll'd,
  Mix with the gods, and fill their seats of gold.

       [Illustration: THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO'S CAR.]

               THE HOURS TAKING THE HORSES FROM JUNO'S CAR.


  And now the Thunderer meditates his flight
  From Ida's summits to the Olympian height.
  Swifter than thought, the wheels instinctive fly,
  Flame through the vast of air, and reach the sky.
  'Twas Neptune's charge his coursers to unbrace,
  And fix the car on its immortal base;
  There stood the chariot, beaming forth its rays,
  Till with a snowy veil he screen'd the blaze.
  He, whose all-conscious eyes the world behold,
  The eternal Thunderer sat, enthroned in gold.
  High heaven the footstool of his feet he makes,
  And wide beneath him all Olympus shakes.
  Trembling afar the offending powers appear'd,
  Confused and silent, for his frown they fear'd.
  He saw their soul, and thus his word imparts:
  "Pallas and Juno! say, why heave your hearts?
  Soon was your battle o'er: proud Troy retired
  Before your face, and in your wrath expired.
  But know, whoe'er almighty power withstand!
  Unmatch'd our force, unconquer'd is our hand:
  Who shall the sovereign of the skies control?
  Not all the gods that crown the starry pole.
  Your hearts shall tremble, if our arms we take,
  And each immortal nerve with horror shake.
  For thus I speak, and what I speak shall stand;
  What power soe'er provokes rejoicing bless the friendly shade.

  The victors keep the field; and Hector calls
  A martial council near the navy walls;
  These to Scamander's bank apart he led,
  Where thinly scatter'd lay the heaps of dead.
  The assembled chiefs, descending on the ground,
  Attend his order, and their prince surround.
  A massy spear he bore of mighty strength,
  Of full ten cubits was the lance's length;
  The point was brass, refulgent to behold,
  Fix'd to the wood with circling rings of gold:
  The noble Hector on his lance reclined,
  And, bending forward, thus reveal'd his mind:

  "Ye valiant Trojans, with attention hear!
  Ye Dardan bands, and generous aids, give ear!
  This day, we hoped, would wrap in conquering flame
  Greece with her ships, and crown our toils with fame.
  But darkness now, to save the cowards, falls,
  And guards them trembling in their wooden walls.
  Obey the night, and use her peaceful hours
  Our steeds to forage, and refresh our powers.
  Straight from the town be sheep and oxen sought,
  And strengthening bread and generous wine be brought
  Wide o'er the field, high blazing to the sky,
  Let numerous fires the absent sun supply,
  The flaming piles with plenteous fuel raise,
  Till the bright morn her purple beam displays;
  Lest, in the silence and the shades of night,
  Greece on her sable ships attempt her flight.
  Not unmolested let the wretches gain
  Their lofty decks, or safely cleave the main;
  Some hostile wound let every dart bestow,
  Some lasting token of the Phrygian foe,
  Wounds, that long hence may ask their spouses' care.
  And warn their children from a Trojan war.
  Now through the circuit of our Ilion wall,
  Let sacred heralds sound the solemn call;
  To bid the sires with hoary honours crown'd,
  And beardless youths, our battlements surround.
  Firm be the guard, while distant lie our powers,
  And let the matrons hang with lights the towers;
  Lest, under covert of the midnight shade,
  The insidious foy. Agamemnon pursues this advice, and Nestor
further prevails upon him to send ambassadors to Achilles, in order to
move him to a reconciliation. Ulysses and Ajax are made choice of, who are
accompanied by old Phoenix. They make, each of them, very moving and
pressing speeches, but are rejected with roughness by Achilles, who
notwithstanding retains Phoenix in his tent. The ambassadors return
unsuccessfully to the camp, and the troops betake themselves to sleep.

This book, and the next following, take up the space of one night, which
is the twenty-seventh from the beginning of the poem. The scene lies on
the sea-shore, the station of the Grecian ships.

  Thus joyful Troy maintain'd the watch of night;
  While fear, pale comrade of inglorious flight,(199)
  And heaven-bred horror, on the Grecian part,
  Sat on each face, and sadden'd every heart.
  As from its cloudy dungeon issuing forth,
  A double tempest of the west and north
  Swells o'er the sea, from Thracia's frozen shore,
  Heaps waves on waves, and bids the Ćgean roar:
  This way and that the boiling deeps are toss'd:
  Such various passions urged the troubled host,
  Great Agamemnon grieved above the rest;
  Superior sorrows swell'd his royal breast;
  Himself his orders to the heralds bears,
  To bid to council all the Grecian peers,
  But bid in whispers: these surround their chief,
  In solemn sadness and majestic grief.
  The king amidst the mournful circle rose:
  Down his wan cheek a briny torrent flows.
  So silent fountains, from a rock's tall head,
 
  Unfit for public rule, or private care,
  That wretch, that monster, who delights in war;
  Whose lust is murder, and whose horrid joy,
  To tear his country, and his kind destroy!
  This night, refresh and fortify thy train;
  Between the trench and wall let guards remain:
  Be that the duty of the young and bold;
  But thou, O king, to council call the old;
  Great is thy sway, and weighty are thy cares;
  Thy high commands must spirit all our wars.
  With Thracian wines recruit thy honour'd guests,
  For happy counsels flow from sober feasts.
  Wise, weighty counsels aid a state distress'd,
  And such a monarch as can choose the best.
  See what a blaze from hostile tents aspires,
  How near our fleet approach the Trojan fires!
  Who can, unmoved, behold the dreadful light?
  What eye beholds them, and can close to-night?
  This dreadful interval determines all;
  To-morrow, Troy must flame, or Greece must fall."

  Thus spoke the hoary sage: the rest obey;
  Swift through the gates the guards direct their way.
  His son was first to pass the lofty mound,
  The generous Thrasymed, in arms renown'd:
  Next him, Ascalaphus, Ialmen, stood,
  The double offspring of the warrior-god:
  Deipyrus, Aphareus, Merion join,
  And Lycomed of Creon's noble line.
  Seven were the leaders of the nightly bands,
  And each bold chief a hundred spears commands.
  The fires they light, to short repasts they fall,
  Some line the trench, and others man the wall.

  The king of men, on public counsels bent,
  Convened the princes in his ample tent,
  Each seized a portion of the kingly feast,
  But stay'd his hand when thirst and hunger ceased.
  Then Nestor spoke, for wisdom long approved,
  And slowly rising, thus the council moved.

  "Monarch of nations! whose superior sway
  Assembled states, and lords of earth obey,
  The laws and sceptres to thy hand are given,
  And millions own the care of thee and Heaven.
  O king! the counsels of my age attend;
  With thee myXAM; fruitful shore,
  There shall he live my son, our honours share,
  And with Orestes' self divide my care.
  Yet more--three daughters in my court are bred,
  And each well worthy of a royal bed;
  Laodice and Iphigenia fair,(203)
  And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair;
  Her let him choose whom most his eyes approve,
  I ask no presents, no reward for love:
  Myself will give the dower; so vast a store
  As never father gave a child before.
  Seven ample cities shall confess his sway,
  Him Enope, and Pherae him obey,
  Cardamyle with ample turrets crown'd,
  And sacred Pedasus for vines renown'd;
  Ćpea fair, the pastures Hira yields,
  And rich Antheia with her flowery fields:(204)
  The whole extent to Pylos' sandy plain,
  Along the verdant margin of the main
  There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil;
  Bold are the men, and generous is the soil;
  There shall he reign, with power and justice crown'd,
  And rule the tributary realms around.
  All this I give, his vengeance to control,
  And sure all this may move his mighty soul.
  Pluto, the grisly god, who never spares,
  Who feels no mercy, and who hears no prayers,
  Lives dark and dreadful in deep hell's abodes,
  And mortals hate him, as the worst of gods
  Great though he be, it fits him to obey,
  Since more than his my years, and more my sway."

                          [Illustration: PLUTO.]

                                  PLUTO.


  The monarch thus. The reverend Nestor then:
  "Great Agamemnon! glorious king of men!
  Such are thy offers as a prince may take,
  And such as fits a generous king to make.
  Let chosen delegates this hour be sent
  (Myself will name them) to Pelides' tent.
  Let Phoenix lead, revered for hoary age,
  Great Ajax next, and Ithacus the sage.
  Yet more to sanctify the word you send,
  Let Hodius and Eurybates attend.
  Now pray to Jove to grant what Greece demands;
  Pray in deep silence,(205) and with purest hands."(206)

                 [Illuix purer wine, and open every soul.
  Of all the warriors yonder host can send,
  Thy friend most honours these, and these thy friend."

  He said: Patroclus o'er the blazing fire
  Heaps in a brazen vase three chines entire:
  The brazen vase Automedon sustains,
  Which flesh of porker, sheep, and goat contains.
  Achilles at the genial feast presides,
  The parts transfixes, and with skill divides.
  Meanwhile Patroclus sweats, the fire to raise;
  The tent is brighten'd with the rising blaze:
  Then, when the languid flames at length subside,
  He strows a bed of glowing embers wide,
  Above the coals the smoking fragments turns
  And sprinkles sacred salt from lifted urns;
  With bread the glittering canisters they load,
  Which round the board Menoetius' son bestow'd;
  Himself, opposed to Ulysses full in sight,
  Each portion parts, and orders every rite.
  The first fat offering to the immortals due,
  Amidst the greedy flames Patroclus threw;
  Then each, indulging in the social feast,
  His thirst and hunger soberly repress'd.
  That done, to Phoenix Ajax gave the sign:
  Not unperceived; Ulysses crown'd with wine
  The foaming bowl, and instant thus began,
  His speech addressing to the godlike man.

  "Health to Achilles! happy are thy guests!
  Not those more honour'd whom Atrides feasts:
  Though generous plenty crown thy loaded boards,
  That, Agamemnon's regal tent affords;
  But greater cares sit heavy on our souls,
  Nor eased by banquets or by flowing bowls.
  What scenes of slaughter in yon fields appear!
  The dead we mourn, and for the living fear;
  Greece on the brink of fate all doubtful stands,
  And owns no help but eia with her flowery fields;
  The whole extent to Pylos' sandy plain,
  Along the verdant margin of the main.
  There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil;
  Bold are the men, and generous is the soil.
  There shalt thou reign, with power and justice crown'd,
  And rule the tributary realms around.
  Such are the proffers which this day we bring,
  Such the repentance of a suppliant king.
  But if all this, relentless, thou disdain,
  If honour and if interest plead in vain,
  Yet some redress to suppliant Greece afford,
  And be, amongst her guardian gods, adored.
  If no regard thy suffering country claim,
  Hear thy own glory, and the voice of fame:
  For now that chief, whose unresisted ire
  Made nations tremble, and whole hosts retire,
  Proud Hector, now, the unequal fight demands,
  And only triumphs to deserve thy hands."

  Then thus the goddess-born: "Ulysses, hear
  A faithful speech, that knows nor art nor fear;
  What in my secret soul is understood,
  My tongue shall utter, and my deeds make good.
  Let Greece then know, my purpose I retain:
  Nor with new treaties vex my peace in vain.
  Who dares think one thing, and another tell,
  My heart detests him as the gates of hell.

  "Then thus in short my fix'd resolves attend,
  Which nor Atrides nor his Greeks can bend;
  Long toils, long perils in their cause I bore,
  But now the unfruitful glories charm no more.
  Fight or not fight, a like reward we claim,
  The wretch and hero find their prize the same.
  Alike regretted in the dust he lies,
  Who yields ignobly, or who bravely dies.
  Of all my dangers, all my glorious pains,
  A life of labours, lo! what fruit remains?
  As the bold bird her helpless young attends,
  From danger guards them, and from want defends;
  In search of prey she wings the spacious air,
  And with the untasted food supplies her care:
  For thankless Greece such hardships have I braved,
  Her wives, her infants, by my labours saved;
  Long sleepless nights in mber more
  Than dust in fields, or sands along the shore;
  Should all these offers for my friendship call,
  'Tis he that offers, and I scorn them all.
  Atrides' daughter never shall be led
  (An ill-match'd consort) to Achilles' bed;
  Like golden Venus though she charm'd the heart,
  And vied with Pallas in the works of art;
  Some greater Greek let those high nuptials grace,
  I hate alliance with a tyrant's race.
  If heaven restore me to my realms with life,
  The reverend Peleus shall elect my wife;
  Thessalian nymphs there are of form divine,
  And kings that sue to mix their blood with mine.
  Bless'd in kind love, my years shall glide away,
  Content with just hereditary sway;
  There, deaf for ever to the martial strife,
  Enjoy the dear prerogative of life.
  Life is not to be bought with heaps of gold.
  Not all Apollo's Pythian treasures hold,
  Or Troy once held, in peace and pride of sway,
  Can bribe the poor possession of a day!
  Lost herds and treasures we by arms regain,
  And steeds unrivall'd on the dusty plain:
  But from our lips the vital spirit fled,
  Returns no more to wake the silent dead.
  My fates long since by Thetis were disclosed,
  And each alternate, life or fame, proposed;
  Here, if I stay, before the Trojan town,
  Short is my date, but deathless my renown:
  If I return, I quit immortal praise
  For years on years, and long-extended days.
  Convinced, though late, I find my fond mistake,
  And warn the Greeks the wiser choice to make;
  To quit these shores, their native seats enjoy,
  Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy.
  Jove's arm display'd asserts her from the skies!
  Her hearts are strengthen'd, and her glories rise.
  Go then to Greece, report our fix'd design;
  Bid all your counsels, all your armies join,
  Let all your forces, all your arts conspire,
  To save the ships, the troops, the chiefs, from fire.
  One stratagem has fail'd, and others will:
  Ye find, Achilles is unconquer'd still.
  Go t)
  To plunge the poniard in my father's breast;
  Then meditate my flight: my friends in vain
  With prayers entreat me, and with force detain.
  On fat of rams, black bulls, and brawny swine,
  They daily feast, with draughts of fragrant wine;
  Strong guards they placed, and watch'd nine nights entire;
  The roofs and porches flamed with constant fire.
  The tenth, I forced the gates, unseen of all:
  And, favour'd by the night, o'erleap'd the wall,
  My travels thence through spacious Greece extend;
  In Phthia's court at last my labours end.
  Your sire received me, as his son caress'd,
  With gifts enrich'd, and with possessions bless'd.
  The strong Dolopians thenceforth own'd my reign,
  And all the coast that runs along the main.
  By love to thee his bounties I repaid,
  And early wisdom to thy soul convey'd:
  Great as thou art, my lessons made thee brave:
  A child I took thee, but a hero gave.
  Thy infant breast a like affection show'd;
  Still in my arms (an ever-pleasing load)
  Or at my knee, by Phoenix wouldst thou stand;
  No food was grateful but from Phoenix' hand.(211)
  I pass my watchings o'er thy helpless years,
  The tender labours, the compliant cares,
  The gods (I thought) reversed their hard decree,
  And Phoenix felt a father's joys in thee:
  Thy growing virtues justified my cares,
  And promised comfort to my silver hairs.
  Now be thy rage, thy fatal rage, resign'd;
  A cruel heart ill suits a manly mind:
  The gods (the only great, and only wise)
  Are moved by offerings, vows, and sacrifice;
  Offending man their high compassion wins,
  And daily prayers atone for daily sins.
  Prayers are Jove's daughters, of celestial race,
  Lame are their feet, and wrinkled is their face;
  With humble mien, and with dejected eyes,
  Constant they follow, where injustice flies.
  Injustice swift, erect, and unconfined,
  Sweeps the wide earth, and tramples o'er mankind,
  While Prayers, to heal her wrongs, move slow behind.
  Who hears  in vain?
  See what effect our low submissions gain!
  Liked or not liked, his words we must relate,
  The Greeks expect them, and our heroes wait.
  Proud as he is, that iron heart retains
  Its stubborn purpose, and his friends disdains.
  Stern and unpitying! if a brother bleed,
  On just atonement, we remit the deed;
  A sire the slaughter of his son forgives;
  The price of blood discharged, the murderer lives:
  The haughtiest hearts at length their rage resign,
  And gifts can conquer every soul but thine.(213)
  The gods that unrelenting breast have steel'd,
  And cursed thee with a mind that cannot yield.
  One woman-slave was ravish'd from thy arms:
  Lo, seven are offer'd, and of equal charms.
  Then hear, Achilles! be of better mind;
  Revere thy roof, and to thy guests be kind;
  And know the men of all the Grecian host,
  Who honour worth, and prize thy valour most."

  "O soul of battles, and thy people's guide!
  (To Ajax thus the first of Greeks replied)
  Well hast thou spoke; but at the tyrant's name
  My rage rekindles, and my soul's on flame:
  'Tis just resentment, and becomes the brave:
  Disgraced, dishonour'd, like the vilest slave!
  Return, then, heroes! and our answer bear,
  The glorious combat is no more my care;
  Not till, amidst yon sinking navy slain,
  The blood of Greeks shall dye the sable main;
  Not till the flames, by Hector's fury thrown,
  Consume your vessels, and approach my own;
  Just there, the impetuous homicide shall stand,
  There cease his battle, and there feel our hand."

  This said, each prince a double goblet crown'd,
  And cast a large libation on the ground;
  Then to their vessels, through the gloomy shades,
  The chiefs return; divine Ulysses leads.
  Meantime Achilles' slaves prepared a bed,
  With fleeces, carpets, and soft linen spread:
  There, till the sacred morn restored the day,
  In slumprayers will burst that swelling heart with pride.
  Be the fierce impulse of his rage obey'd,
  Our battles let him or desert or aid;
  Then let him arm when Jove or he think fit:
  That, to his madness, or to Heaven commit:
  What for ourselves we can, is always ours;
  This night, let due repast refresh our powers;
  (For strength consists in spirits and in blood,
  And those are owed to generous wine and food;)
  But when the rosy messenger of day
  Strikes the blue mountains with her golden ray,
  Ranged at the ships, let all our squadrons shine
  In flaming arms, a long-extended line:
  In the dread front let great Atrides stand,
  The first in danger, as in high command."

  Shouts of acclaim the listening heroes raise,
  Then each to Heaven the due libations pays;
  Till sleep, descending o'er the tents, bestows
  The grateful blessings of desired repose."(214)

                        [Illustration: ACHILLES.]

                                ACHILLES.





BOOK X.


ARGUMENT.

THE NIGHT-ADVENTURE OF DIOMED AND ULYSSES.

Upon the refusal of Achilles to return to the army, the distress of
Agamemnon is described in the most lively manner. He takes no rest that
night, but passes through the camp, awaking the leaders, and contriving
all possible methods for the public safety. Menelaus, Nestor, Ulysses, and
Diomed are employed in raising the rest of the captains. They call a
council of war, and determine to send scouts into the enemies' camp, to
learn their posture, and discover their intentions. Diomed undertakes this
hazardous enterprise, and makes choice of Ulysses for his companion. In
their passage they surprise Dolon, whom Hector had sent on a like design
to the camp of the Grecians. From him they are informed of the situation
of the Trojan and auxiliary forces, and particularly of Rhesus, and the
Thracians who were lately arrived. They pass on with success; kill Rhesus,
with several of his officers, and seize the famous horses of that prince,rs,
  The shining helmet, and the pointed spears;
  The dreadful weapons of the warrior's rage,
  That, old in arms, disdain'd the peace of age.
  Then, leaning on his hand his watchful head,
  The hoary monarch raised his eyes and said:

  "What art thou, speak, that on designs unknown,
  While others sleep, thus range the camp alone;
  Seek'st thou some friend or nightly sentinel?
  Stand off, approach not, but thy purpose tell."

  "O son of Neleus, (thus the king rejoin'd,)
  Pride of the Greeks, and glory of thy kind!
  Lo, here the wretched Agamemnon stands,
  The unhappy general of the Grecian bands,
  Whom Jove decrees with daily cares to bend,
  And woes, that only with his life shall end!
  Scarce can my knees these trembling limbs sustain,
  And scarce my heart support its load of pain.
  No taste of sleep these heavy eyes have known,
  Confused, and sad, I wander thus alone,
  With fears distracted, with no fix'd design;
  And all my people's miseries are mine.
  If aught of use thy waking thoughts suggest,
  (Since cares, like mine, deprive thy soul of rest,)
  Impart thy counsel, and assist thy friend;
  Now let us jointly to the trench descend,
  At every gate the fainting guard excite,
  Tired with the toils of day and watch of night;
  Else may the sudden foe our works invade,
  So near, and favour'd by the gloomy shade."

  To him thus Nestor: "Trust the powers above,
  Nor think proud Hector's hopes confirm'd by Jove:
  How ill agree the views of vain mankind,
  And the wise counsels of the eternal mind!
  Audacious Hector, if the gods ordain
  That great Achilles rise and rage again,
  What toils attend thee, and what woes remain!
  Lo, faithful Nestor thy command obeys;
  The care is next our other chiefs to raise:
  Ulysses, Diomed, we chiefly need;
  Meges for strength, Oileus famed for speed.
  Some other be despatch'd of nimbler feet,
  To those tall ships, remotest of the fleet,
  Where lie great Ajax and the king of Crete.(216)
ed in arms, his brave companions round:
  Each sunk in sleep, extended on the field,
  His head reclining on his bossy shield.
  A wood of spears stood by, that, fix'd upright,
  Shot from their flashing points a quivering light.
  A bull's black hide composed the hero's bed;
  A splendid carpet roll'd beneath his head.
  Then, with his foot, old Nestor gently shakes
  The slumbering chief, and in these words awakes:

  "Rise, son of Tydeus! to the brave and strong
  Rest seems inglorious, and the night too long.
  But sleep'st thou now, when from yon hill the foe
  Hangs o'er the fleet, and shades our walls below?"

  At this, soft slumber from his eyelids fled;
  The warrior saw the hoary chief, and said:
  "Wondrous old man! whose soul no respite knows,
  Though years and honours bid thee seek repose,
  Let younger Greeks our sleeping warriors wake;
  Ill fits thy age these toils to undertake."
  "My friend, (he answered,) generous is thy care;
  These toils, my subjects and my sons might bear;
  Their loyal thoughts and pious love conspire
  To ease a sovereign and relieve a sire:
  But now the last despair surrounds our host;
  No hour must pass, no moment must be lost;
  Each single Greek, in this conclusive strife,
  Stands on the sharpest edge of death or life:
  Yet, if my years thy kind regard engage,
  Employ thy youth as I employ my age;
  Succeed to these my cares, and rouse the rest;
  He serves me most, who serves his country best."

  This said, the hero o'er his shoulders flung
  A lion's spoils, that to his ankles hung;
  Then seized his ponderous lance, and strode along.
  Meges the bold, with Ajax famed for speed,
  The warrior roused, and to the entrenchments lead.

  And now the chiefs approach the nightly guard;
  A wakeful squadron, each in arms prepared:
  The unwearied watch their listening leaders keep,
  And, couching close, repel invading sleep.
  So faithful dogs their fleecy charge maintain,
  With toil protected from the prowd inly trembled for his brother's sake.

  "Then thus (the godlike Diomed rejoin'd)
  My choice declares the impulse of my mind.
  How can I doubt, while great Ulysses stands
  To lend his counsels and assist our hands?
  A chief, whose safety is Minerva's care;
  So famed, so dreadful, in the works of war:
  Bless'd in his conduct, I no aid require;
  Wisdom like his might pass through flames of fire."

  "It fits thee not, before these chiefs of fame,
  (Replied the sage,) to praise me, or to blame:
  Praise from a friend, or censure from a foe,
  Are lost on hearers that our merits know.
  But let us haste--Night rolls the hours away,
  The reddening orient shows the coming day,
  The stars shine fainter on the ethereal plains,
  And of night's empire but a third remains."

  Thus having spoke, with generous ardour press'd,
  In arms terrific their huge limbs they dress'd.
  A two-edged falchion Thrasymed the brave,
  And ample buckler, to Tydides gave:
  Then in a leathern helm he cased his head,
  Short of its crest, and with no plume o'erspread:
  (Such as by youths unused to arms are worn:)
  No spoils enrich it, and no studs adorn.
  Next him Ulysses took a shining sword,
  A bow and quiver, with bright arrows stored:
  A well-proved casque, with leather braces bound,
  (Thy gift, Meriones,) his temples crown'd;
  Soft wool within; without, in order spread,(217)
  A boar's white teeth grinn'd horrid o'er his head.
  This from Amyntor, rich Ormenus' son,
  Autolycus by fraudful rapine won,
  And gave Amphidamas; from him the prize
  Molus received, the pledge of social ties;
  The helmet next by Merion was possess'd,
  And now Ulysses' thoughtful temples press'd.
  Thus sheathed in arms, the council they forsake,
  And dark through paths oblique their progress take.
  Just then, in sign she favour'd their intent,
  A long-wing'd heron great Minerva sent:
  This, though surrounding shades obscured their view.
  By the shrill clang and whistling wings ge bids me meet
  This high achievement, and explore the fleet:
  But first exalt thy sceptre to the skies,
  And swear to grant me the demanded prize;
  The immortal coursers, and the glittering car,
  That bear Pelides through the ranks of war.
  Encouraged thus, no idle scout I go,
  Fulfil thy wish, their whole intention know,
  Even to the royal tent pursue my way,
  And all their counsels, all their aims betray."

  The chief then heaved the golden sceptre high,
  Attesting thus the monarch of the sky:
  "Be witness thou! immortal lord of all!
  Whose thunder shakes the dark aerial hall:
  By none but Dolon shall this prize be borne,
  And him alone the immortal steeds adorn."

  Thus Hector swore: the gods were call'd in vain,
  But the rash youth prepares to scour the plain:
  Across his back the bended bow he flung,
  A wolf's grey hide around his shoulders hung,
  A ferret's downy fur his helmet lined,
  And in his hand a pointed javelin shined.
  Then (never to return) he sought the shore,
  And trod the path his feet must tread no more.
  Scarce had he pass'd the steeds and Trojan throng,
  (Still bending forward as he coursed along,)
  When, on the hollow way, the approaching tread
  Ulysses mark'd, and thus to Diomed;

  "O friend! I hear some step of hostile feet,
  Moving this way, or hastening to the fleet;
  Some spy, perhaps, to lurk beside the main;
  Or nightly pillager that strips the slain.
  Yet let him pass, and win a little space;
  Then rush behind him, and prevent his pace.
  But if too swift of foot he flies before,
  Confine his course along the fleet and shore,
  Betwixt the camp and him our spears employ,
  And intercept his hoped return to Troy."

  With that they stepp'd aside, and stoop'd their head,
  (As Dolon pass'd,) behind a heap of dead:
  Along the path the spy unwary flew;
  Soft, at just distance, both the chiefs pursue.
  So distant they, and such the space between,
  As when two teams of mules divide the greenur fleet be borne,
  Or leave me here, a captive's fate to mourn,
  In cruel chains, till your return reveal
  The truth or falsehood of the news I tell."

  To this Tydides, with a gloomy frown:
  "Think not to live, though all the truth be shown:
  Shall we dismiss thee, in some future strife
  To risk more bravely thy now forfeit life?
  Or that again our camps thou may'st explore?
  No--once a traitor, thou betray'st no more."

  Sternly he spoke, and as the wretch prepared
  With humble blandishment to stroke his beard,
  Like lightning swift the wrathful falchion flew,
  Divides the neck, and cuts the nerves in two;
  One instant snatch'd his trembling soul to hell,
  The head, yet speaking, mutter'd as it fell.
  The furry helmet from his brow they tear,
  The wolf's grey hide, the unbended bow and spear;
  These great Ulysses lifting to the skies,
  To favouring Pallas dedicates the prize:

  "Great queen of arms, receive this hostile spoil,
  And let the Thracian steeds reward our toil;
  Thee, first of all the heavenly host, we praise;
  O speed our labours, and direct our ways!"
  This said, the spoils, with dropping gore defaced,
  High on a spreading tamarisk he placed;
  Then heap'd with reeds and gathered boughs the plain,
  To guide their footsteps to the place again.

  Through the still night they cross the devious fields,
  Slippery with blood, o'er arms and heaps of shields,
  Arriving where the Thracian squadrons lay,
  And eased in sleep the labours of the day.
  Ranged in three lines they view the prostrate band:
  The horses yoked beside each warrior stand.
  Their arms in order on the ground reclined,
  Through the brown shade the fulgid weapons shined:
  Amidst lay Rhesus, stretch'd in sleep profound,
  And the white steeds behind his chariot bound.
  The welcomeXAMtood, or with his reeking blade
  To send more heroes to the infernal shade,
  Drag off the car where Rhesus' armour lay,
  Or heave with manly force, and lift away.
  While unresolved the son of Tydeus stands,
  Pallas appears, and thus her chief commands:

  "Enough, my son; from further slaughter cease,
  Regard thy safety, and depart in peace;
  Haste to the ships, the gotten spoils enjoy,
  Nor tempt too far the hostile gods of Troy."

  The voice divine confess'd the martial maid;
  In haste he mounted, and her word obey'd;
  The coursers fly before Ulysses' bow,
  Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow.

  Not unobserved they pass'd: the god of light
  Had watch'd his Troy, and mark'd Minerva's flight,
  Saw Tydeus' son with heavenly succour bless'd,
  And vengeful anger fill'd his sacred breast.
  Swift to the Trojan camp descends the power,
  And wakes Hippocoon in the morning-hour;
  (On Rhesus' side accustom'd to attend,
  A faithful kinsman, and instructive friend;)
  He rose, and saw the field deform'd with blood,
  An empty space where late the coursers stood,
  The yet-warm Thracians panting on the coast;
  For each he wept, but for his Rhesus most:
  Now while on Rhesus' name he calls in vain,
  The gathering tumult spreads o'er all the plain;
  On heaps the Trojans rush, with wild affright,
  And wondering view the slaughters of the night.

  Meanwhile the chiefs, arriving at the shade
  Where late the spoils of Hector's spy were laid,
  Ulysses stopp'd; to him Tydides bore
  The trophy, dropping yet with Dolon's gore:
  Then mounts again; again their nimbler feet
  The coursers ply, and thunder towards the fleet.

 [Illustration: DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUS.]

         DIOMED AND ULYSSES RETURNING WITH THE SPOILS OF RHESUS.


  Old Nestor first perceived the approaching sound,
  Bespeaking thus the Grecian peers around:
  "Methinks the noise of trampling steeds I hear,
  Thickening this way, and gatherin all before him and Hector is
commanded by Jupiter (who sends Iris for that purpose) to decline the
engagement, till the king shall be wounded and retire from the field. He
then makes a great slaughter of the enemy. Ulysses and Diomed put a stop
to him for a time but the latter, being wounded by Paris, is obliged to
desert his companion, who is encompassed by the Trojans, wounded, and in
the utmost danger, till Menelaus and Ajax rescue him. Hector comes against
Ajax, but that hero alone opposes multitudes, and rallies the Greeks. In
the meantime Machaon, in the other wing of the army, is pierced with an
arrow by Paris, and carried from the fight in Nestor's chariot. Achilles
(who overlooked the action from his ship) sent Patroclus to inquire which
of the Greeks was wounded in that manner; Nestor entertains him in his
tent with an account of the accidents of the day, and a long recital of
some former wars which he remembered, tending to put Patroclus upon
persuading Achilles to fight for his countrymen, or at least to permit him
to do it, clad in Achilles' armour. Patroclus, on his return, meets
Eurypylus also wounded, and assists him in that distress.

This book opens with the eight and-twentieth day of the poem, and the same
day, with its various actions and adventures is extended through the
twelfth, thirteenth, fourteenth, fifteenth, sixteenth, seventeenth, and
part of the eighteenth books. The scene lies in the field near the
monument of Ilus.

  The saffron morn, with early blushes spread,(219)
  Now rose refulgent from Tithonus' bed;
  With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
  And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light:
  When baleful Eris, sent by Jove's command,
  The torch of discord blazing in her hand,
  Through the red skies her bloody sign extends,
  And, wrapt in tempests, o'er the fleet descends.
  High on Ulysses' bark her horrid stand
  She took, and thunder'd through the seas and land.

  Even Ajax and Achilles heard the sound,
  Whose shipter enter eneous bodies lie.

  Two sons of Priam next to battle move,
  The product, one of marriage, one of love:(222)
  In the same car the brother-warriors ride;
  This took the charge to combat, that to guide:
  Far other task, than when they wont to keep,
  On Ida's tops, their father's fleecy sheep.
  These on the mountains once Achilles found,
  And captive led, with pliant osiers bound;
  Then to their sire for ample sums restored;
  But now to perish by Atrides' sword:
  Pierced in the breast the base-born Isus bleeds:
  Cleft through the head his brother's fate succeeds,
  Swift to the spoil the hasty victor falls,
  And, stript, their features to his mind recalls.
  The Trojans see the youths untimely die,
  But helpless tremble for themselves, and fly.
  So when a lion ranging o'er the lawns.
  Finds, on some grassy lair, the couching fawns,
  Their bones he cracks, their reeking vitals draws,
  And grinds the quivering flesh with bloody jaws;
  The frighted hind beholds, and dares not stay,
  But swift through rustling thickets bursts her way;
  All drown'd in sweat, the panting mother flies,
  And the big tears roll trickling from her eyes.

  Amidst the tumult of the routed train,
  The sons of false Antimachus were slain;
  He who for bribes his faithless counsels sold,
  And voted Helen's stay for Paris' gold.
  Atrides mark'd, as these their safety sought,
  And slew the children for the father's fault;
  Their headstrong horse unable to restrain,
  They shook with fear, and dropp'd the silken rein;
  Then in the chariot on their knees they fall,
  And thus with lifted hands for mercy call:

  "O spare our youth, and for the life we owe,
  Antimachus shall copious gifts bestow:
  Soon as he hears, that, not in battle slain,
  The Grecian ships his captive sons detain,
  Large heaps of brass in ransom shall be told,
  And steel well-tempered, and persuasive gold."

  These words, attended with the flood of tears,
  The youths address'd to unrelentingguideless fury rolls,
  Breaking their ranks, and crushing out their souls;
  While his keen falchion drinks the warriors' lives;
  More grateful, now, to vultures than their wives!

  Perhaps great Hector then had found his fate,
  But Jove and destiny prolong'd his date.
  Safe from the darts, the care of heaven he stood,
  Amidst alarms, and death, and dust, and blood.

  Now past the tomb where ancient Ilus lay,
  Through the mid field the routed urge their way:
  Where the wild figs the adjoining summit crown,
  The path they take, and speed to reach the town.
  As swift, Atrides with loud shouts pursued,
  Hot with his toil, and bathed in hostile blood.
  Now near the beech-tree, and the Scaean gates,
  The hero halts, and his associates waits.
  Meanwhile on every side around the plain,
  Dispersed, disorder'd, fly the Trojan train.
  So flies a herd of beeves, that hear dismay'd
  The lion's roaring through the midnight shade;
  On heaps they tumble with successless haste;
  The savage seizes, draws, and rends the last.
  Not with less fury stern Atrides flew,
  Still press'd the rout, and still the hindmost slew;
  Hurl'd from their cars the bravest chiefs are kill'd,
  And rage, and death, and carnage load the field.

  Now storms the victor at the Trojan wall;
  Surveys the towers, and meditates their fall.
  But Jove descending shook the Idaean hills,
  And down their summits pour'd a hundred rills:
  The unkindled lightning in his hand he took,
  And thus the many-coloured maid bespoke:

  "Iris, with haste thy golden wings display,
  To godlike Hector this our word convey--
  While Agamemnon wastes the ranks around,
  Fights in the front, and bathes with blood the ground,
  Bid him give way; but issue forth commands,
  And trust the war to less important hands:
  But when, or wounded by the spear or dart,
  That chief shall mount his chariot, and depart,
  Then Jove shall string his arm, and fire his breast,
  Then to her ships shall flying Grorses fly; the chariot smokes along.
  Clouds from their nostrils the fierce coursers blow,
  And from their sides the foam descends in snow;
  Shot through the battle in a moment's space,
  The wounded monarch at his tent they place.

  No sooner Hector saw the king retired,
  But thus his Trojans and his aids he fired:
  "Hear, all ye Dardan, all ye Lycian race!
  Famed in close fight, and dreadful face to face:
  Now call to mind your ancient trophies won,
  Your great forefathers' virtues, and your own.
  Behold, the general flies! deserts his powers!
  Lo, Jove himself declares the conquest ours!
  Now on yon ranks impel your foaming steeds;
  And, sure of glory, dare immortal deeds."

  With words like these the fiery chief alarms
  His fainting host, and every bosom warms.
  As the bold hunter cheers his hounds to tear
  The brindled lion, or the tusky bear:
  With voice and hand provokes their doubting heart,
  And springs the foremost with his lifted dart:
  So godlike Hector prompts his troops to dare;
  Nor prompts alone, but leads himself the war.
  On the black body of the foe he pours;
  As from the cloud's deep bosom, swell'd with showers,
  A sudden storm the purple ocean sweeps,
  Drives the wild waves, and tosses all the deeps.
  Say, Muse! when Jove the Trojan's glory crown'd,
  Beneath his arm what heroes bit the ground?
  Assaeus, Dolops, and Autonous died,
  Opites next was added to their side;
  Then brave Hipponous, famed in many a fight,
  Opheltius, Orus, sunk to endless night;
  Ćsymnus, Agelaus; all chiefs of name;
  The rest were vulgar deaths unknown to fame.
  As when a western whirlwind, charged with storms,
  Dispels the gather'd clouds that Notus forms:
  The gust continued, violent and strong,
  Rolls sable clouds in heaps on heaps along;
  Now to the skies the foaming billows rears,
  Now breaks the surge, and wide the bottom bares:
  Thus, raging Hector, with resistless hands,
  O'erturns, confounds, and scatters all thes the birds of air,
  And leaves such objects as distract the fair."
  Ulysses hastens with a trembling heart,
  Before him steps, and bending draws the dart:
  Forth flows the blood; an eager pang succeeds;
  Tydides mounts, and to the navy speeds.

  Now on the field Ulysses stands alone,
  The Greeks all fled, the Trojans pouring on;
  But stands collected in himself, and whole,
  And questions thus his own unconquer'd soul:

  "What further subterfuge, what hopes remain?
  What shame, inglorious if I quit the plain?
  What danger, singly if I stand the ground,
  My friends all scatter'd, all the foes around?
  Yet wherefore doubtful? let this truth suffice,
  The brave meets danger, and the coward flies.
  To die or conquer, proves a hero's heart;
  And, knowing this, I know a soldier's part."

  Such thoughts revolving in his careful breast,
  Near, and more near, the shady cohorts press'd;
  These, in the warrior, their own fate enclose;
  And round him deep the steely circle grows.
  So fares a boar whom all the troop surrounds
  Of shouting huntsmen and of clamorous hounds;
  He grinds his ivory tusks; he foams with ire;
  His sanguine eye-balls glare with living fire;
  By these, by those, on every part is plied;
  And the red slaughter spreads on every side.
  Pierced through the shoulder, first Deiopis fell;
  Next Ennomus and Thoon sank to hell;
  Chersidamas, beneath the navel thrust,
  Falls prone to earth, and grall grace,
  Fate calls thee hence and finish'd is thy race.
  Nor longer check my conquests on the foe;
  But, pierced by this, to endless darkness go,
  And add one spectre to the realms below!"

  He spoke, while Socus, seized with sudden fright,
  Trembling gave way, and turn'd his back to flight;
  Between his shoulders pierced the following dart,
  And held its passage through the panting heart:
  Wide in his breast appear'd the grisly wound;
  He falls; his armour rings against the ground.
  Then thus Ulysses, gazing on the slain:
  "Famed son of Hippasus! there press the plain;
  There ends thy narrow span assign'd by fate,
  Heaven owes Ulysses yet a longer date.
  Ah, wretch! no father shall thy corpse compose;
  Thy dying eyes no tender mother close;
  But hungry birds shall tear those balls away,
  And hovering vultures scream around their prey.
  Me Greece shall honour, when I meet my doom,
  With solemn funerals and a lasting tomb."

  Then raging with intolerable smart,
  He writhes his body, and extracts the dart.
  The dart a tide of spouting gore pursued,
  And gladden'd Troy with sight of hostile blood.
  Now troops on troops the fainting chief invade,
  Forced he recedes, and loudly calls for aid.
  Thrice to its pitch his lofty voice he rears;
  The well-known voice thricps of slain.
  There Nestor and Idomeneus oppose
  The warrior's fury; there the battle glows;
  There fierce on foot, or from the chariot's height,
  His sword deforms the beauteous ranks of fight.
  The spouse of Helen, dealing darts around,
  Had pierced Machaon with a distant wound:
  In his right shoulder the broad shaft appear'd,
  And trembling Greece for her physician fear'd.
  To Nestor then Idomeneus begun:
  "Glory of Greece, old Neleus' valiant son!
  Ascend thy chariot, haste with speed away,
  And great Machaon to the ships convey;
  A wise physician skill'd our wounds to heal,
  Is more than armies to the public weal."
  Old Nestor mounts the seat; beside him rode
  The wounded offspring of the healing god.
  He lends the lash; the steeds with sounding feet
  Shake the dry field, and thunder toward the fleet.

  But now Cebriones, from Hector's car,
  Survey'd the various fortune of the war:
  "While here (he cried) the flying Greeks are slain,
  Trojans on Trojans yonder load the plain.
  Before great Ajax see the mingled throng
  Of men and chariots driven in heaps along!
  I know him well, distinguish'd o'er the field
  By the broad glittering of the sevenfold shield.
  Thither, O Hector, thither urge thy steeds,
  There danger calls, and there the combat bleeds;
  There horse and foot in mingled deaths unite,
  And groans of slaughter mix with shouts of fight."

  Thus having spoke, the driver's lash resounds;
  Swift through the ranks the rapid chariot bounds;
  Stung by the stroke, the coursers scour the fields,
  O'er heaps of carcases, and hills of shields.
  The horses' hoofs are bathed in heroes' gore,
  And, dashing, purple all the car before;
  The groaning axle sable drops distils,
  And mangled carnage clogs the rapid wheels.
  Here Hector, plunging through the thickest fight,
  Broke the dark phalanx, and let in the light:
  (By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone.
  The ranks he scatter'd and the troops o'erthrown:)
e victor rushing to despoil the dead,
  From Paris' bow a vengeful arrow fled;
  Fix'd in his nervous thigh the weapon stood,
  Fix'd was the point, but broken was the wood.
  Back to the lines the wounded Greek retired,
  Yet thus retreating, his associates fired:

  "What god, O Grecians! has your hearts dismay'd?
  Oh, turn to arms; 'tis Ajax claims your aid.
  This hour he stands the mark of hostile rage,
  And this the last brave battle he shall wage:
  Haste, join your forces; from the gloomy grave
  The warrior rescue, and your country save."
  Thus urged the chief: a generous troop appears,
  Who spread their bucklers, and advance their spears,
  To guard their wounded friend: while thus they stand
  With pious care, great Ajax joins the band:
  Each takes new courage at the hero's sight;
  The hero rallies, and renews the fight.

  Thus raged both armies like conflicting fires,
  While Nestor's chariot far from fight retires:
  His coursers steep'd in sweat, and stain'd with gore,
  The Greeks' preserver, great Machaon, bore.
  That hour Achilles, from the topmost height
  Of his proud fleet, o'erlook'd the fields of fight;
  His feasted eyes beheld around the plain
  The Grecian rout, the slaying, and the slain.
  His friend Machaon singled from the rest,
  A transient pity touch'd his vengeful breast.
  Straight to Menoetius' much-loved son he sent:
  Graceful as Mars, Patroclus quits his tent;
  In evil hour! Then fate decreed his doom,
  And fix'd the date of all his woes to come.

  "Why calls my friend? thy loved injunctions lay;
  Whate'er thy will, Patroclus shall obey."

  "O first of friends! (Pelides thus replied)
  Still at my heart, and ever at my side!
  The time is come, when yon despairing host
  Shall learn the value of the man they lost:
  Now at my knees the Greeks shall pour their moan,
  And proud Atrides tremble on his throne.
  Go now to Nestor, and from him be taught
  What wounded warrior late his chariot brought:
  For, savy groan,
  Ulysses, Agamemnon, Diomed,
  And stern Eurypylus, already bleed.
  But, ah! what flattering hopes I entertain!
  Achilles heeds not, but derides our pain:
  Even till the flames consume our fleet he stays,
  And waits the rising of the fatal blaze.
  Chief after chief the raging foe destroys;
  Calm he looks on, and every death enjoys.
  Now the slow course of all-impairing time
  Unstrings my nerves, and ends my manly prime;
  Oh! had I still that strength my youth possess'd,
  When this bold arm the Epeian powers oppress'd,
  The bulls of Elis in glad triumph led,
  And stretch'd the great Itymonaeus dead!
  Then from my fury fled the trembling swains,
  And ours was all the plunder of the plains:
  Fifty white flocks, full fifty herds of swine,
  As many goats, as many lowing kine:
  And thrice the number of unrivall'd steeds,
  All teeming females, and of generous breeds.
  These, as my first essay of arms, I won;
  Old Neleus gloried in his conquering son.
  Thus Elis forced, her long arrears restored,
  And shares were parted to each Pylian lord.
  The state of Pyle was sunk to last despair,
  When the proud Elians first commenced the war:
  For Neleus' sons Alcides' rage had slain;
  Of twelve bold brothers, I alone remain!
  Oppress'd, we arm'd; and now this conquest gain'd,
  My sire three hundred chosen sheep obtain'd.
  (That large reprisal he might justly claim,
  For prize defrauded, and insulted fame,
  When Elis' monarch, at the public course,
  Detain'd his chariot, and victorious horse.)
  The rest the people shared; myself survey'd
  The just partition, and due victims paid.
  Three days were past, when Elis rose to war,
  With many a courser, and with many a car;
  The sons of Actor at their army's head
  (Young as they were) the vengeful squadrons led.
  High on the rock fair Thryoessa stands,
  Our utmost frontier on the Pylian lands:
  Not far the streams of famed Alphaeus flow:
  The stream they pass'd, and pitch'd their  her o'er-labour'd train
  Shall seek their walls, and Greece respire again."

  This touch'd his generous heart, and from the tent
  Along the shore with hasty strides he went;
  Soon as he came, where, on the crowded strand,
  The public mart and courts of justice stand,
  Where the tall fleet of great Ulysses lies,
  And altars to the guardian gods arise;
  There, sad, he met the brave Euaemon's son,
  Large painful drops from all his members run;
  An arrow's head yet rooted in his wound,
  The sable blood in circles mark'd the ground.
  As faintly reeling he confess'd the smart,
  Weak was his pace, but dauntless was his heart.
  Divine compassion touch'd Patroclus' breast,
  Who, sighing, thus his bleeding friend address'd:

  "Ah, hapless leaders of the Grecian host!
  Thus must ye perish on a barbarous coast?
  Is this your fate, to glut the dogs with gore,
  Far from your friends, and from your native shore?
  Say, great Eurypylus! shall Greece yet stand?
  Resists she yet the raging Hector's hand?
  Or are her heroes doom'd to die with shame,
  And this the period of our wars and fame?"

  Eurypylus replies: "No more, my friend;
  Greece is no more! this day her glories end;
  Even to the ships victorious Troy pursues,
  Her force increasing as her toil renews.
  Those chiefs, that used her utmost rage to meet,
  Lie pierced with wounds, and bleeding in the fleet.
  But, thou, Patroclus! act a friendly part,
  Lead to my ships, and draw this deadly dart;
  With lukewarm water wash the gore away;
  With healing balms the raging smart allay,
  Such as sage Chiron, sire of pharmacy,
  Once taught Achilles, and Achilles thee.
  Of two famed surgeons, Podalirius stands
  This hour surrounded by the Trojan bands;
  And great Machaon, wounded in his tent,
  Now wants that succour which so oft he lent."

  To him the chief: "What then remains to do?
  The event of things the gods alone can view.
  Charged by Achilles' great command I fly,
  And bear witatient fury breathe,
  And snort and tremble at the gulf beneath;
  Just at the brink they neigh, and paw the ground,
  And the turf trembles, and the skies resound.
  Eager they view'd the prospect dark and deep,
  Vast was the leap, and headlong hung the steep;
  The bottom bare, (a formidable show!)
  And bristled thick with sharpen'd stakes below.
  The foot alone this strong defence could force,
  And try the pass impervious to the horse.
  This saw Polydamas; who, wisely brave,
  Restrain'd great Hector, and this counsel gave:

  "O thou, bold leader of the Trojan bands!
  And you, confederate chiefs from foreign lands!
  What entrance here can cumbrous chariots find,
  The stakes beneath, the Grecian walls behind?
  No pass through those, without a thousand wounds,
  No space for combat in yon narrow bounds.
  Proud of the favours mighty Jove has shown,
  On certain dangers we too rashly run:
  If 'tis will our haughty foes to tame,
  Oh may this instant end the Grecian name!
  Here, far from Argos, let their heroes fall,
  And one great day destroy and bury all!
  But should they turn, and here oppress our train,
  What hopes, what methods of retreat remain?
  Wedged in the trench, by our own troops confused,
  In one promiscuous carnage crush'd and bruised,
  All Troy must perish, if their arms prevail,
  Nor shall a Trojan live to tell the tale.
  Hear then, ye warriors! and obey with speed;
  Back from the trenches let your steeds be led;
  Then all alighting, wedged in firm array,
  Proceed on foot, and Hector lead the way.
  So Greece shall stoop before our conquering power,
  And this (if Jove consent) her fatal hour."

                [Illustration: POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR.]

                        POLYDAMAS ADVISING HECTOR.


  This counsel pleased: the godlike Hector sprung
  Swift from his seat; his clanging armour rung.
  The chief's example follow'd by his train,
  Each quits his car, and issues on the plain,
  By orders strict the neus shall boast thy fall!
  Fierce to the left he drives, where from the plain
  The flying Grecians strove their ships to gain;
  Swift through the wall their horse and chariots pass'd,
  The gates half-open'd to receive the last.
  Thither, exulting in his force, he flies:
  His following host with clamours rend the skies:
  To plunge the Grecians headlong in the main,
  Such their proud hopes; but all their hopes were vain!

  To guard the gates, two mighty chiefs attend,
  Who from the Lapiths' warlike race descend;
  This Polypoetes, great Perithous' heir,
  And that Leonteus, like the god of war.
  As two tall oaks, before the wall they rise;
  Their roots in earth, their heads amidst the skies:
  Whose spreading arms with leafy honours crown'd,
  Forbid the tempest, and protect the ground;
  High on the hills appears their stately form,
  And their deep roots for ever brave the storm.
  So graceful these, and so the shock they stand
  Of raging Asius, and his furious band.
  Orestes, Acamas, in front appear,
  And OEnomaus and Thoon close the rear:
  In vain their clamours shake the ambient fields,
  In vain around them beat their hollow shields;
  The fearless brothers on the Grecians call,
  To guard their navies, and defend the wall.
  Even when they saw Troy's sable troops impend,
  And Greece tumultuous from her towers descend,
  Forth from the portals rush'd the intrepid pair,
  Opposed their breasts, and stood themselves the war.
  So two wild boars spring furious from their den,
  Roused with the cries of dogs and voice of men;
  On every side the crackling trees they tear,
  And root the shrubs, and lay the forest bare;
  They gnash their tusks, with fire their eye-balls roll,
  Till some wide wound lets out their mighty soul.
  Around their heads the whistling javelins sung,
  With sounding strokes their brazen targets rung;
  Fierce was the fight, while yet the Grecian powers
  Maintain'd the walls, and mann'd the lofty towers:
  To save thethout a sign his sword the brave man draws,
  And asks no omen but his country's cause.
  But why should'st thou suspect the war's success?
  None fears it more, as none promotes it less:
  Though all our chiefs amidst yon ships expire,
  Trust thy own cowardice to escape their fire.
  Troy and her sons may find a general grave,
  But thou canst live, for thou canst be a slave.
  Yet should the fears that wary mind suggests
  Spread their cold poison through our soldiers' breasts,
  My javelin can revenge so base a part,
  And free the soul that quivers in thy heart."

  Furious he spoke, and, rushing to the wall,
  Calls on his host; his host obey the call;
  With ardour follow where their leader flies:
  Redoubling clamours thunder in the skies.
  Jove breathes a whirlwind from the hills of Ide,
  And drifts of dust the clouded navy hide;
  He fills the Greeks with terror and dismay,
  And gives great Hector the predestined day.
  Strong in themselves, but stronger in his aid,
  Close to the works their rigid siege they laid.
  In vain the mounds and massy beams defend,
  While these they undermine, and those they rend;
  Upheaved the piles that prop the solid wall;
  And heaps on heaps the smoky ruins fall.
  Greece on her ramparts stands the fierce alarms;
  The crowded bulwarks blaze with waving arms,
  Shield touching shield, a long refulgent row;
  Whence hissing darts, incessant, rain below.
  The bold Ajaces fly from tower to tower,
  And rouse, with flame divine, the Grecian power.
  The generous impulse every Greek obeys;
  Threats urge the fearful; and the valiant, praise.

  "Fellows in arms! whose deeds are known to fame,
  And you, whose ardour hopes an equal name!
  Since not alike endued with force or art;
  Behold a day when each may act his part!
  A day to fire the brave, and warm the cold,
  To gain new glories, or augment the old.
  Urge those who stand, and those who faint, excite;
  Drown Hector's vaunts in loud exhorts of fight;
  Cod,
  Of fight insatiate, prodigal of blood.
  In vain he calls; the din of helms and shields
  Rings to the skies, and echoes through the fields,
  The brazen hinges fly, the walls resound,
  Heaven trembles, roar the mountains, thunders all the ground
  Then thus to Thoos: "Hence with speed (he said),
  And urge the bold Ajaces to our aid;
  Their strength, united, best may help to bear
  The bloody labours of the doubtful war:
  Hither the Lycian princes bend their course,
  The best and bravest of the hostile force.
  But if too fiercely there the foes contend,
  Let Telamon, at least, our towers defend,
  And Teucer haste with his unerring bow
  To share the danger, and repel the foe."

  Swift, at the word, the herald speeds along
  The lofty ramparts, through the martial throng,
  And finds the heroes bathed in sweat and gore,
  Opposed in combat on the dusty shore.
  "Ye valiant leaders of our warlike bands!
  Your aid (said Thoos) Peteus' son demands;
  Your strength, united, best may help to bear
  The bloody labours of the doubtful war:
  Thither the Lycian princes bend their course,
  The best and bravest of the hostile force.
  But if too fiercely, here, the foes contend,
  At least, let Telamon those towers defend,
  And Teucer haste with his unerring bow
  To share the danger, and repel the foe."

  Straight to the fort great Ajax turn'd his care,
  And thus bespoke his brothers of the war:
  "Now, valiant Lycomede! exert your might,
  And, brave Oileus, prove your force in fight;
  To you I trust the fortune of the field,
  Till by this arm the foe shall be repell'd:
  That done, expect me to complete the day
  Then with his sevenfold shield he strode away.
  With equal steps bold Teucer press'd the shore,
  Whose fatal bow the strong Pandion bore.

  High on the walls appear'd the Lycian powers,
  Like some black tempest gathering round the towers:
  The Greeks, oppress'd, their utmost force unite,
  Prepared to labour in the unequal fight: weapon stood,
  And through his buckler drove the trembling wood;
  But Jove was present in the dire debate,
  To shield his offspring, and avert his fate.
  The prince gave back, not meditating flight,
  But urging vengeance, and severer fight;
  Then raised with hope, and fired with glory's charms,
  His fainting squadrons to new fury warms.
  "O where, ye Lycians, is the strength you boast?
  Your former fame and ancient virtue lost!
  The breach lies open, but your chief in vain
  Attempts alone the guarded pass to gain:
  Unite, and soon that hostile fleet shall fall:
  The force of powerful union conquers all."

  This just rebuke inflamed the Lycian crew;
  They join, they thicken, and the assault renew:
  Unmoved the embodied Greeks their fury dare,
  And fix'd support the weight of all the war;
  Nor could the Greeks repel the Lycian powers,
  Nor the bold Lycians force the Grecian towers.
  As on the confines of adjoining grounds,
  Two stubborn swains with blows dispute their bounds;
  They tug, they sweat; but neither gain, nor yield,
  One foot, one inch, of the contended field;
  Thus obstinate to death, they fight, they fall;
  Nor these can keep, nor those can win the wall.
  Their manly breasts are pierced with many a wound,
  Loud strokes are heard, and rattling arms resound;
  The copious slaughter covers all the shore,
  And the high ramparts drip with human gore.

  As when two scales are charged with doubtful loads,
  From side to side the trembling balance nods,
  (While some laborious matron, just and poor,
  With nice exactness weighs her woolly store,)
  Till poised aloft, the resting beam suspends
  Each equal weight; nor this, nor that, descends:(227)
  So stood the war, till Hector's matchless might,
  With fates prevailing, turn'd the scale of fight.
  Fierce as a whirlwind up the walls he flies,
  And fires his host with loud repeated cries.
  "Advance, ye Trojans! lend your valiant hands,
  Haste to the fleet, and toss the blar, nor observed in vain.
  In Samothracia, on a mountain's brow,
  Whose waving woods o'erhung the deeps below,
  He sat; and round him cast his azure eyes
  Where Ida's misty tops confusedly rise;
  Below, fair Ilion's glittering spires were seen;
  The crowded ships and sable seas between.
  There, from the crystal chambers of the main
  Emerged, he sat, and mourn'd his Argives slain.
  At Jove incensed, with grief and fury stung,
  Prone down the rocky steep he rush'd along;
  Fierce as he pass'd, the lofty mountains nod,
  The forest shakes; earth trembled as he trod,
  And felt the footsteps of the immortal god.
  From realm to realm three ample strides he took,
  And, at the fourth, the distant Ćgae shook.

  Far in the bay his shining palace stands,
  Eternal frame! not raised by mortal hands:
  This having reach'd, his brass-hoof'd steeds he reins,
  Fleet as the winds, and deck'd with golden manes.
  Refulgent arms his mighty limbs infold,
  Immortal arms of adamant and gold.
  He mounts the car, the golden scourge applies,
  He sits superior, and the chariot flies:
  His his sire:
  If yet some heavenly power your breast excite,
  Breathe in your hearts, and string your arms to fight,
  Greece yet may live, her threaten'd fleet maintain:
  And Hector's force, and Jove's own aid, be vain."

  Then with his sceptre, that the deep controls,
  He touch'd the chiefs, and steel'd their manly souls:
  Strength, not their own, the touch divine imparts,
  Prompts their light limbs, and swells their daring hearts.
  Then, as a falcon from the rocky height,
  Her quarry seen, impetuous at the sight,
  Forth-springing instant, darts herself from high,
  Shoots on the wing, and skims along the sky:
  Such, and so swift, the power of ocean flew;
  The wide horizon shut him from their view.

  The inspiring god Oileus' active son
  Perceived the first, and thus to Telamon:

  "Some god, my friend, some god in human form
  Favouring descends, and wills to stand the storm.
  Not Calchas this, the venerable seer;
  Short as he turned, I saw the power appear:
  I mark'd his parting, and the steps he trod;
  His own bright evidence reveals a god.
  Even now some energy divine I share,
  And seem to walk on wings, and tread in air!"

  "With equal ardour (Telamon returns)
  My soul is kindled, and my bosom burns;
  New rising spirits all my force alarm,
  Lift each impatient limb, and brace my arm.
  This ready arm, unthinking, shakes the dart;
  The blood pours back, and fortifies my heart:
  Singly, methinks, yon towering chief I meet,
  And stretch the dreadful Hector at my feet."

  Full of the god that urged their burning breast,
  The heroes thus their mutual warmth express'd.
  Neptune meanwhile the routed Greeks inspired;
  Who, breathless, pale, with length of labours tired,
  Pant in the ships; while Troy to conquest calls,
  And swarms victorious o'er their yielding walls:
  Trembling before the impending storm they lie,
  While tears of rage stand burning in their eye.
  Greece sunk they thought, and this their fatal hour;
  But nd levell'd at the skies with pointing rays,
  Their brandish'd lances at each motion blaze.

  Thus breathing death, in terrible array,
  The close compacted legions urged their way:
  Fierce they drove on, impatient to destroy;
  Troy charged the first, and Hector first of Troy.
  As from some mountain's craggy forehead torn,
  A rock's round fragment flies, with fury borne,
  (Which from the stubborn stone a torrent rends,)
  Precipitate the ponderous mass descends:
  From steep to steep the rolling ruin bounds;
  At every shock the crackling wood resounds;
  Still gatherine bravest of her chiefs in fame:
  With Priam's sons, a guardian of the throne,
  He lived, beloved and honour'd as his own.
  Him Teucer pierced between the throat and ear:
  He groans beneath the Telamonian spear.
  As from some far-seen mountain's airy crown,
  Subdued by steel, a tall ash tumbles down,
  And soils its verdant tresses on the ground;
  So falls the youth; his arms the fall resound.
  Then Teucer rushing to despoil the dead,
  From Hector's hand a shining javelin fled:
  He saw, and shunn'd the death; the forceful dart
  Sung on, and pierced Amphimachus's heart,
  Cteatus' son, of Neptune's forceful line;
  Vain was his courage, and his race divine!
  Prostrate he falls; his clanging arms resound,
  And his broad buckler thunders on the ground.
  To seize his beamy helm the victor flies,
  And just had fastened on the dazzling prize,
  When Ajax' manly arm a javelin flung;
  Full on the shield's round boss the weapon rung;
  He felt the shock, nor more was doom'd to feel,
  Secure in mail, and sheath'd in shining steel.
  Repulsed he yields; the victor Greeks obtain
  The spoils contested, and bear off the slain.
  Between the leaders of the Athenian line,
  (Stichius the brave, Menestheus the divine,)
  Deplored Amphimachus, sad object! lies;
  Imbrius remains the fierce Ajaces' prize.
  As two grim lions bear across the lawn,
  Snatch'd from devouring hounds, a slaughter'd fawn.
  In their fell jaws high-lifting through the wood,
  And sprinkling all the shrubs with drops of blood;
  So these, the chief: great Ajax from the dead
  Strips his bright arms; Oileus lops his head:
  Toss'd like a ball, and whirl'd in air away,
  At Hector's feet the gory visage lay.

  The god of ocean, fired with stern disdain,
  And pierced with sorrow for his grandson slain,
  Inspires the Grecian hearts, confirms their hands,
  And breathes destruction on the Trojan bands.
  Swift as a whirlwind rushing to the fleet,
  He finds the lance-famed Idomen of CreCrete to war;
  This speaks my grief: this headless lance I wield;
  The rest lies rooted in a Trojan shield."

  To whom the Cretan: "Enter, and receive
  The wonted weapons; those my tent can give;
  Spears I have store, (and Trojan lances all,)
  That shed a lustre round the illumined wall,
  Though I, disdainful of the distant war,
  Nor trust the dart, nor aim the uncertain spear,
  Yet hand to hand I fight, and spoil the slain;
  And thence these trophies, and these arms I gain.
  Enter, and see on heaps the helmets roll'd,
  And high-hung spears, and shields that flame with gold."

  "Nor vain (said Merion) are our martial toils;
  We too can boast of no ignoble spoils:
  But those my ship contains; whence distant far,
  I fight conspicuous in the van of war,
  What need I more? If any Greek there be
  Who knows not Merion, I appeal to thee."

  To this, Idomeneus: "The fields of fight
  Have proved thy valour, and unconquer'd might:
  And were some ambush for the foes design'd,
  Even there thy courage would not lag behind:
  In that sharp service, singled from the rest,
  The fear of each, or valour, stands confess'd.
  No force, no firmness, the pale coward shows;
  He shifts his place: his colour comes and goes:
  A dropping sweat creeps cold on every part;
  Against his bosom beats his quivering heart;
  Terror and death in his wild eye-balls stare;
  With chattering teeth he stands, and stiffening hair,
  And looks a bloodless image of despair!
  Not so the brave--still dauntless, still the same,
  Unchanged his colour, and unmoved his frame:
  Composed his thought, determined is his eye,
  And fix'd his soul, to conquer or to die:
  If aught disturb the tenour of his breast,
  'Tis but the wish to strike before the rest.

  "In such assays thy blameless worth is known,
  And every art of dangerous war thy own.
  By chance of fight whatever wounds you bore,
  Those wounds were glorious all, and all before;
  Such as may teach, 'twas still thy  afar;
  Dire was the gleam of breastplates, helms, and shields,
  And polish'd arms emblazed the flaming fields:
  Tremendous scene! that general horror gave,
  But touch'd with joy the bosoms of the brave.

  Saturn's great sons in fierce contention vied,
  And crowds of heroes in their anger died.
  The sire of earth and heaven, by Thetis won
  To crown with glory Peleus' godlike son,
  Will'd not destruction to the Grecian powers,
  But spared awhile the destined Trojan towers;
  While Neptune, rising from his azure main,
  Warr'd on the king of heaven with stern disdain,
  And breathed revenge, and fired the Grecian train.
  Gods of one source, of one ethereal race,
  Alike divine, and heaven their native place;
  But Jove the greater; first-born of the skies,
  And more than men, or gods, supremely wise.
  For this, of Jove's superior might afraid,
  Neptune in human form conceal'd his aid.
  These powers enfold the Greek and Trojan train
  In war and discord's adamantine chain,
  Indissolubly strong: the fatal tie
  Is stretch'd on both, and close compell'd they die.

  Dreadful in arms, and grown in combats grey,
  The bold Idomeneus controls the day.
  First by his hand Othryoneus was slain,
  Swell'd with false hopes, with mad ambition vain;
  Call'd by the voice of war to martial fame,
  From high Cabesus' distant walls he came;
  Cassandra's love he sought, with boasts of power,
  And promised conquest was the proffer'd dower.
  The king consented, by his vaunts abused;
  The king consented, but the fates refused.
  Proud of himself, and of the imagined bride,
  The field he measured with a larger stride.
  Him as he stalk'd, the Cretan javelin found;
  Vain was his breastplate to repel the wound:
  His dream of glory lost, he plunged to hell;
  His arms resounded as the boaster fell.
  The great Idomeneus bestrides the dead;
  "And thus (he cries) behold thy promise sped!
  Such is the help thy arms to Ilion bring,
  And such the contract of th lies:
  For thee, through hell's black portals stand display'd,
  This mate shall joy thy melancholy shade."

  Heart-piercing anguish, at the haughty boast,
  Touch'd every Greek, but Nestor's son the most.
  Grieved as he was, his pious arms attend,
  And his broad buckler shields his slaughter'd friend:
  Till sad Mecistheus and Alastor bore
  His honour'd body to the tented shore.

  Nor yet from fight Idomeneus withdraws;
  Resolved to perish in his country's cause,
  Or find some foe, whom heaven and he shall doom
  To wail his fate in death's eternal gloom.
  He sees Alcathous in the front aspire:
  Great Ćsyetes was the hero's sire;
  His spouse Hippodame, divinely fair,
  Anchises' eldest hope, and darling care:
  Who charm'd her parents' and her husband's heart
  With beauty, sense, and every work of art:
  He once of Ilion's youth the loveliest boy,
  The fairest she of all the fair of Troy.
  By Neptune now the hapless hero dies,
  Who covers with a cloud those beauteous eyes,
  And fetters every limb: yet bent to meet
  His fate he stands; nor shuns the lance of Crete.
  Fix'd urns to fight:
  The Greek awaits him with collected might.
  As the fell boar, on some rough mountain's head,
  Arm'd with wild terrors, and to slaughter bred,
  When the loud rustics rise, and shout from far,
  Attends the tumult, and expects the war;
  O'er his bent back the bristly horrors rise;
  Fires stream in lightning from his sanguine eyes,
  His foaming tusks both dogs and men engage;
  But most his hunters rouse his mighty rage:
  So stood Idomeneus, his javelin shook,
  And met the Trojan with a lowering look.
  Antilochus, Deipyrus, were near,
  The youthful offspring of the god of war,
  Merion, and Aphareus, in field renown'd:
  To these the warrior sent his voice around.
  "Fellows in arms! your timely aid unite;
  Lo, great Ćneas rushes to the fight:
  Sprung from a god, and more than mortal bold;
  He fresh in youth, and I in arms grown old.
  Else should this hand, this hour decide the strife,
  The great dispute, of glory, or of life."

  He spoke, and all, as with one soul, obey'd;
  Their lifted bucklers cast a dreadful shade
  Around the chief. Ćneas too demands
  Th' assisting forces of his native bands;
  Paris, Deiphobus, Agenor, join;
  (Co-aids and captains of the Trojan line;)
  In order follow all th' embodied train,
  Like Ida's flocks proceeding o'er the plain;
  Before his fleecy care, erect and bold,
  Stalks the proud ram, the father of the bold.
  With joy the swain surveys them, as he leads
  To the cool fountains, through the well-known meads:
  So joys Ćneas, as his native band
  Moves on in rank, and stretches o'er the land.

  Round dread Alcathous now the battle rose;
  On every side the steely circle grows;
  Now batter'd breast-plates and hack'd helmets ring,
  And o'er their heads unheeded javelins sing.
  Above the rest, two towering chiefs appear,
  There great Idomeneus, Ćneas here.
  Like gods of war, dispensing fate, they stood,
  And burn'd to drench the ground with mutual blood.
  The Trojan weapon whe godlike owner lies!
  Raging with grief, great Menelaus burns,
  And fraught with vengeance, to the victor turns:
  That shook the ponderous lance, in act to thhe bled,
  Tore off his arms, and, loud-exulting, said:

  "Thus, Trojans, thus, at length be taught to fear;
  O race perfidious, who delight in war!
  Already noble deeds ye have perform'd;
  A princess raped transcends a navy storm'd:
  In such bold feats your impious might approve,
  Without th' assistance, or the fear of Jove.
  The violated rites, the ravish'd dame;
  Our heroes slaughter'd and our ships on flame,
  Crimes heap'd on crimes, shall bend your glory down,
  And whelm in ruins yon flagitious town.
  O thou, great father! lord of earth and skies,
  Above the thought of man, supremely wise!
  If from thy hand the fates of mortals flow,
  From whence this favour to an impious foe?
  A godless crew, abandon'd and unjust,
  Still breathing rapine, violence, and lust?
  The best of things, beyond their measure, cloy;
  Sleep's balmy blessing, love's endearing joy;
  The feast, the dance; whate'er mankind desire,
  Even the sweet charms of sacred numbers tire.
  But Troy for ever reaps a dire delight
  In thirst of slaughter, and in lust of fight."

  This said, he seized (while yet the carcase heaved)
  The bloody armour, which his train received:
  Then sudden mix'd among the warring crew,
  And the bold son of Pylaemenes slew.
  Harpalion had through Asia travell'd far,
  Following his martial father to the war:
  Through filial love he left his native shore,
  Never, ah, never to behold it more!
  His unsuccessful spear he chanced to fling
  Against the target of the Spartan king;
  Thus of his lance disarm'd, from death he flies,
  And turns around his apprehensive eyes.
  Him, through the hip transpiercing as he fled,
  The shaft of Merion mingled with the dead.
  Beneath the bone the glancing point descends,
  And, driving down, the swelling bladder rends:
  Sunk in his sad companions' arms he lay,
  And in short pantings sobb'd his soul away;
  (Like some vile worm extended on the ground;)
  While life's red torrent gush'd from out the wo  Meges the strong the Epaean bands controll'd,
  And Dracius prudent, and Amphion bold:
  The Phthians, Medon, famed for martial might,
  And brave Podarces, active in the fight.
  This drew from Phylacus his noble line;
  Iphiclus' son: s this from warring well!
  Content with what the bounteous gods have given,
  Seek not alone to engross the gifts of Heaven.
  To some the powers of bloody war belong,
  To some sweet music and the charm of song;
  To few, and wondrous few, has Jove assign'd
  A wise, extensive, all-considering mind;
  Their guardians these, the nations round confess,
  And towns and empires for their safety bless.
  If Heaven have lodged this virtue in my breast,
  Attend, O Hector! what I judge the best,
  See, as thou mov'st, on dangers dangers spread,
  And war's whole fury burns around thy head.
  Behold! distress'd within yon hostile wall,
  How many Trojans yield, disperse, or fall!
  What troops, out-number'd, scarce the war maintain!
  And what brave heroes at the ships lie slain!
  Here cease thy fury: and, the chiefs and kings
  Convoked to council, weigh jeund;
  Swift as he leap'd his clanging arms resound.
  "To guard this post (he cried) thy art employ,
  And here detain the scatter'd youth of Troy;
  Where yonder heroes faint, I bend my way,
  And hasten back to end the doubtful day."

  This said, the towering chief prepares to go,
  Shakes his white plumes that to the breezes flow,
  And seems a moving mountain topp'd with snow.
  Through all his host, inspiring force, he flies,
  And bids anew the martial thunder rise.
  To Panthus' son, at Hector's high command
  Haste the bold leaders of the Trojan band:
  But round the battlements, and round the plain,
  For many a chief he look'd, but look'd in vain;
  Deiphobus, nor Helenus the seer,
  Nor Asius' son, nor Asius' self appear:
  For these were pierced with many a ghastly wound,
  Some cold in death, some groaning on the ground;
  Some low in dust, (a mournful object) lay;
  High on the wall some breathed their souls away.

  Far on the left, amid the throng he found
  (Cheering the troops, and dealing deaths around)
  The graceful Paris; whom, with fury moved,
  Opprobrious thus, th' impatient chief reproved:

  "Ill-fated Paris! slave to womankind,
  As smooth of face as fraudulent of mind!
  Where is Deiphobus, where Asius gone?
  The godlike father, and th' intrepid son?
  The force of Helenus, dispensing fate;
  And great Othryoneus, so fear'd of late?
  Black fate hang's o'er thee from th' avenging gods,
  Imperial Troy from her foundations nods;
  Whelm'd in thy country's ruin shalt thou fall,
  And one devouring vengeance swallow all."

  When Paris thus: "Mlow,
  But such as those of Jove's high lineage born,
  The blue-eyed maid, or he that gilds the morn,)
  As this decisive day shall end the fame
  Of Greece, and Argos be no more a name.
  And thou, imperious! if thy madness wait
  The lance of Hector, thou shalt meet thy fate:
  That giant-corse, extended on the shore,
  Shall largely feast the fowls with fat and gore."

  He said; and like a lion stalk'd along:
  With shouts incessant earth and ocean rung,
  Sent from his following host: the Grecian train
  With answering thunders fill'd the echoing plain;
  A shout that tore heaven's concave, and, above,
  Shook the fix'd splendours of the throne of Jove.

                     [Illustration: GREEK EARRINGS.]

                             GREEK EARRINGS.





BOOK XIV.


ARGUMENT.(231)

JUNO DECEIVES JUPITER BY THE GIRDLE OF VENU-mind engage,
  Fluctuates in doubtful thought the Pylian sage,
  To join the host, or to the general haste;
  Debating long, he fixes on the last:
  Yet, as he moves, the sight his bosom warms,
  The field rings dreadful with the clang of arms,
  The gleaming falchions flash, the javelins fly;
  Blows echo blows, and all or kill or die.

  Him, in his march, the wounded princes meet,
  By tardy steps ascending from the fleet:
  The king of men, Ulysses the divine,
  And who to Tydeus owes his noble line.(232)
  (Their ships at distance from the battle stand,
  In lines advanced along the shelving strand:
  Whose bay, the fleet unable to contain
  At length; beside the margin of the main,
  Rank above rank, the crowded ships they moor:
  Who landed first, lay highest on the shore.)
  Supported on the spears, they took their way,
  Unfit to fight, but anxious for the day.
  Nestor's approach alarm'd each Grecian breast,
  Whom thus the general of the host address'd:

  "O grace and glory of the Achaian name;
  What drives thee, Nestor, from the field of fame?
  Shall then proud Hector see his boast fulfill'd,
  Our fleets in ashes, and our heroes kill'd?
  Such was his threat, ah! now too soon made good,
  On many a Grecian bosom writ in blood.
  Is every heart inflamed with equal rage
  Against your king, nor will one chief engage?
  And have I lived to see with mournful eyes
  In every Greek a new Achilles rise?"

  Gerenian Nestor then: "So fate has will'd;
  And all-honfirming time has fate fulfill'd.
  Not he that thunders from the aerial bower,
  Not Jove himself, upon the past has power.
  The wall, our late inviol obey?
  Is this a general's voice that calls to flight,
  While war hangs doubtful, while his soldiers fight?
  What more could Troy? What yet their fate denies
  Thou givest the foe: all Greece becomes their prize.
  No more the troops (our hoisted sails in view,
  Themselves abandon'd) shall the fight pursue;
  But thy ships flying, with despair shall see;
  And owe destruction to a prince like thee."

  "Thy just reproofs (Atrides calm replies)
  Like arrows pierce me, for thy words are wise.
  Unwilling as I am to lose the host,
  I force not Greece to quit this hateful coast;
  Glad I submit, whoe'er, or young, or old,
  Aught, more conducive to our weal, unfold."

  Tydides cut him short, and thus began:
  "Such counsel if you seek, behold the man
  Who boldly gives it, and what he shall say,
  Young though he be, disdain not to obey:
  A youth, who from the mighty Tydeus springs,
  May speak to councils and assembled kings.
  Hear then in me the great OEnides' son,
  Whose honoured dust (his race of glory run)
  Lies whelm'd in ruins of the Theban wall;
  Brave in his life, and glorious in his fall.
  With three bold sons was generous Prothous bless'd,
  Who Pleuron's walls and Calydon possess'd;
  Melas and Agrius, but (who far surpass'd
  The rest in courage) OEneus was the last.
  From him, my sire. From Calydon expell'd,
  He pahall thou view the scattered Trojan bands
  Fly diverse; while proud kings, and chiefs renown'd,
  Driven heaps on heaps, with clouds involved around
  Of rolling dust, their winged wheels employ
  To hide their ignominious heads in Troy."

  He spoke, then rush'd amid the warrior crew,
  And sent his voice before him as he flew,
  Loud, as the shout encountering armies yield
  When twice ten thousand shake the labouring field;
  Such was the voice, and such the thundering sound
  Of him whose trident rends the solid ground.
  Each Argive bosom beats to meet the fight,
  And grisly war appears acolours glow'd:
  Large clasps of gold the foldings gather'd round,
  A golden zone her swelling bosom bound.
  Far-beaming pendants tremble in her ear,
  Each gem illumined with a triple star.
  Then o'er her head she cast a veil more white
  Than new-fallen snow, and dazzling as the light.
  Last her fair feet celestial sandals grace.
  Thus issuing radiant with majestic pace,
  Forth from the dome the imperial goddess moves,
  And calls the mother of the smiles and loves.

  "How long (to Venus thus apart she cried)
  Shall human strife celestial minds divide?
  Ah yet, will Venus aid Saturnia's joy,
  And set aside the cause of Greece and Troy?"

  "Let heaven's dread empress (Cytheraea said)
  Speak her request, and deem her will obey'd."

  "Then grant me (said the queen) those conquering charms,
  That power, which mortals and immortals warms,
  That love, which melts mankind in fierce desires,
  And burns the sons of heaven with sacred fires!

  "For lo! I haste to those remote abodes,
  Where the great parents, (sacred source of gods!)
  Ocean and Tethys their old empire keep,
  On the last limits of the land and deep.
  In their kind arms my tender years were past;
  What time old Saturn, from Olympus cast,
  Of upper heaven to Jove resign'd the reign,
  Whelm'd under the huge mass of earth and main.
  For strife, I hear, has made the union cease,
  Which held so long that ancient pair in peace.
  What honour, and what love, shall I obtain,
  If I compose those fatal feuds again;
  Once more their minds in mutual ties engage,
  And, what my youth has owed, repay their age!"

  She said. With awe divine, the queen of love
  Obey'd the sister and the wife of Jove;
  And from her fragrant breast the zone embraced,(233)
  With various skill and high embroidery graced.
  In this was every art, and every charm,
  To win the wisest, and the coldest warm:
  Fond love, the gentle vow, the gay desire,
  The kind deceit, the still-reviving fire,
  Persuas,
  (The friend of earth and heaven,) her wings display'd;
  Impower'd the wrath of gods and men to tame,
  Even Jove revered the venerable dame."

  "Vain are thy fears (the queen of heaven replies,
  And, speaking, rolls her large majestic eyes);
  Think'st thou that Troy has Jove's high favour won,
  Like great Alcides, his all-conquering son?
  Hear, and obey the mistress of the skies,
  Nor for the deed expect a vulgar prize;
  For know, thy loved-one shall be ever thine,
  The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine."(235)

  "Swear then (he said) by those tremendous floods
  That roar through hell, and bind the invoking gods:
  Let the great parent earth one hand sustain,
  And stretch the other o'er the sacred main:
  Call the black Titans, that with Chronos dwell,
  To hear and witness from the depths of hell;
  That she, my loved-one, shall be ever mine,
  The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine."

  The queen assents, and from the infernal bowers
  Invokes the sable subtartarean powers,
  And those who rule the inviolable floods,
  Whom mortals name the dread Titanian gods.

        [Illustration: SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER.]

                SLEEP ESCAPING FROM THE WRATH OF JUPITER.


  Then swift as wind, o'er Lemnos' smoky isle
  They wing their way, and Imbrus' sea-beat soil;
  Through air, unseen, involved in darkness glide,
  And light on Lectos, on the point of Ide:
  (Mother of savages, whose echoing hills
  Are heard resounding with a hundred rills:)
  Fair Ida trembles underneath the god;
  Hush'd are her mountains, and her forests nod.
  There on a fir, whose spiry branches rise
  To join its summit to the neighbouring skies;
  Dark in embowering shade, conceal'd from sight,
  Sat Sleep, in likeness of the bird of night.
  (Chalcis his name by those of heavenly birth,
  But call'd Cymindis by the race of earth.)

  To Ida's top successful Juno flies;
  Great Jove surveys her with desiring eyes:
  The god, whose lightning of slumber flew,
  On human lids to drop the balmy dew.
  Neptune, with zeal increased, renews his care,
  And towering in the foremost ranks of war,
  Indignant thus--"Oh once of martial fame!
  O Greeks! if yet ye can deserve the name!
  This half-recover'd day shall Troy obtain?
  Shall Hector thunder at your ships again?
  Lo! still he vaunts, and threats the fleet with fires,
  While stern Achilles in his wrath retires.
  One hero's loss too tamely you deplore,
  Be still yourselves, and ye shall need no more.
  Oh yet, if glory any bosom warms,
  Brace on your firmest helms, and stand to arms:
  His strongest spear each valiant Grecian wield,
  Each valiant Grecian seize his broadest shield;
  Let to the weak the lighter arms belong,
  The ponderous targe be wielded by the strong.
  Thus arm'd, not Hector shall our presence stay;
  Myself, ye Greeks! myself will lead the way."

                      [Illustration: GREEK SHIELD.]

                              GREEK SHIELD.


  The troops assent; their martial arms they change:
  The busy chiefs their banded legions range.
  The kings, though wounded, and oppress'd with pain,
  With helpful hands themselves assist the train.
  The strong and cumbrous arms the valiant wield,
  The weaker warrior takes a lighter shield.
.
  "Lo thus (the victor cries) we rule the field,
  And thus their arms the race of Panthus wield:
  From this unerring hand there flies no dart
  But bathes its point within a Grecian heart.
  Propp'd on that spear to which thou owest thy fall,
  Go, guide thy darksome steps to Pluto's dreary hall."

  He said, and sorrow touch'd each Argive breast:
  The soul of Ajax burn'd above the rest.
  As by his side the groaning warrior fell,
  At the fierce foe he launch'd his piercing steel;
  The foe, reclining, shunn'd the flying death;
  But fate, Archilochus, demands thy breath:
  Thy lofty birth no succour could impart,
  The wings of death o'ertook thee on the dart;
  Swift to perform heaven's fatal will, it fled
  Full on the juncture of the neck and head,
  And took the joint, and cut the nerves in twain:
  The dropping head first tumbled on the plain.
  So just the stroke, that yet the body stood
  Erect, then roll'd along the sands in blood.

  "Here, proud Polydamas, here turn thy eyes!
  (The towering Ajax loud-insulting cries:)
  Say, is this chief extended on the plain
  A worthy vengeance for Prothoenor slain?
  Mark well his port! his figure and his face
  Nor speak him vulgar, nor of vulgar race;
  Some lines, methinks, may make his lineage known,
  Antenor's brother, or perhaps his son."

  He spake, and smiled severe, for well he knew
  The bleeding youth: Troy sadden'd at the view.
  But furious Acamas avenged his cause;
  As Promachus his slaughtered brother draws,
  He pierced his heart--"Such fate attends you all,
  Proud Argives! destined by our arms to fall.
  Not Troy alone, but haughty Greece, shall share
  The toils, the sorrows, and the wounds of war.
  Behold your Promachus deprived of breath,
  A victim owed to my brave brother's death.
  Not unappeased he enters Pluto's gate,
  Who leaves a brother to revenge his fate."

  Heart-piercing anguish struck the Grecian host,
  But touch'd the breast of bold Peneleus most;
  At the pround.
  But stretch'd in heaps before Oileus' son,
  Fall mighty numbers, mighty numbers run;
  Ajax the less, of all the Grecian race
  Skill'd in pursuit, and swiftest in the chase.

                         [Illustration: BACCHUS.]

                                 BACCHUS.





BOOK XV.


ARGUMENT.

THE FIFTH BATTLE AT THE SHIPS; AND THE ACTS OF AJAX.

Jupiter, awaking, sees the Trojans repulsed from the trenches, Hector in a
swoon, and Neptune at the head of the Greeks: he is highly incensed at the
artifice of Juno, who appeases him by her submissions; she is then sent to
Iris and Apollo. Juno, repairing to the assembly of the gods, attempts,
with extraordinary address, to incense them against Jupiter; in particular
she touches Mars with a violent resentment; he is ready to take arms, but
is prevented by Minerva. Iris and Apollo obey the orders of Jupiter; Iris
commands Neptune to leave the battle, to which, after much reluctance and
passion, he consents. Apollo reinspires Hector with vigour, brings him
back to the battle, marches before him with his aegis, and turns the
fortune of the fight. He breaks down great part of the Grecian wall: the
Trojans rush in, and attempt to fire the first line of the fleet, but are,
as yet, repelled by the greater Ajax with a prodigious slaughter.

  Now in swift flight they pass the trench profound,
  And many a chief lay gasping on the ground:
  Then stopp'd and panted, where the chariots lie
  Fear on their cheek, and horror in their eye.
  Meanwhile, awaken'd from his dream of love,
  On Ida's summit sat imperial Jove:
  Round the wide fields he cast a careful view,
  There saw the Trojans fly, the Greeks pursue;
  These proud in arms, those scatter'd o'er the plain
  And, 'midst the war, the monarch of the main.
  Not far, great Hector on the dust he spies,
  (His sad associates round with weeping eyes,)
  Ejecting blood, and panting yet for breath,
  His senses wandering to the verge of death.
  The god beheldivine Sarpedon, falls!
  Vanquish'd at last by Hector's lance he lies.
  Then, nor till then, shall great Achilles rise:
  And lo! that instant, godlike Hector dies.
  From that great hour the war's whole fortune turns,
  Pallas assists, and lofty Ilion burns.
  Not till that day shall Jove relax his rage,
  Nor one of all the heavenly host engage
  In aid of Greece. The promise of a god
  I gave, and seal'd it with the almighty nod,
  Achilles' glory to the stars to raise;
  Such was our word, and fate the word obeys."

  The trembling queen (the almighty order given)
  Swift from the Idaean summit shot to heaven.
  As some wayfaring man, who wanders o'er
  In thought a length of lands he trod before,
  Sends forth his active mind from place to place,
  Joins hill to dale, and measures space with space:
  So swift flew Juno to the bless'd abodes,
  If thought of man can match the speed of gods.
  There sat the powers in awful synod placed;
  They bow'd, and made obeisance as she pass'd
  Through all the brazen dome: with goblets crown'd(239)
  They hail her queen; the nectar streams around.
  Fair Themis first presents the golden bowl,
  And anxious asks what cares disturb her soul?

  To whom the white-arm'd goddess thus replies:
  "Enough thou know'st the tyrant of the skies,
  Severely bent his purpose to fulfil,
  Unmoved his mind, and unrestrain'd his will.
  Go thou, the feasts of heaven attend thy call;
  Bid the crown'd nectar circle round the hall:
  But Jove shall thunder through the ethereal dome
  Such stern decrees, such threaten'd woes to come,
  As soon shall freeze mankind with dire surprise,
  And damp the eternal banquets of the skies."

  The goddess said, and sullen took her place;
  Black horror sadden'd each celestial face.
  To see the gathering grudge in every breast,
  Smiles on her lips a spleenful joy express'd;
  While on her wrinkled front, and eyebrow bent,
  Sat stedfast care, and lowering discontent.
  Thus she proceeds--"Ae:
  Assign'd by lot, our triple rule we know;
  Infernal Pluto sways the shades below;
  O'er the wide clouds, and o'er the starry plain,
  Ethereal Jove extends his high domain;
  My court beneath the hoary waves I keep,
  And hush the roarings of the sacred deep;
  Olympus, and this earth, in common lie:
  What claim has here the tyrant of the sky?
  Far in the distant clouds let him control,
  And awe the younger brothers of the pole;
  There to his children his commands be given,
  The trembling, servile, second race of heaven."

  "And must I then (said she), O sire of floods!
  Bear this fierce answer to the king of gods?
  Correct it yet, and change thy rash intent;
  A noble mind disdains not to repent.
  To elder brothers guardian fiends are given,
  To scourge the wretch insulting them and heaven."

  "Great is the profit (thus the god rejoin'd)
  When ministers are blest with prudent mind:
  Warn'd by thy words, to powerful Jove I yield,
  And quit, though angry, the contended field:
  Not but his threats with justice I disclaim,
  The same our honours, and our birth the same.
  If yet, forgetful of his promise given
  To Hermes, Pallas, and the queen of heaven,
  To favour Ilion, that perfidious place,
  He breaks his faith with half the ethereal race;
  Give him to know, unless the Grecian train
  Lay yon proud structures level with the plain,
  Howe'er the offence by other gods be pass'd,
  The wrath of Neptune shall for ever last."

  Thus speaking, furious from the field he strode,
  And plunged into the bosom of the flood.
  The lord of thunders, from his lofty height
  Beheld, and thus bespoke the source of light:

  "Behold! the god whose liquid arms are hurl'd
  Around the globe, whose earthquakes rock the world,
  Desists at length his t grief, what wound, withholds thee from the war?"

  The fainting hero, as the vision bright
  Stood shining o'er him, half unseal'd his sight:

  "What blest immortal, with commanding breath,
  Thus wakens Hector from the sleep of death?
  Has fame not told, how, while my trusty sword
  Bathed Greece in slaughter, and her battle gored,
  The mighty Ajax with a deadly blow
  Had almost sunk me to the shades below?
  Even yet, methinks, the gliding ghosts I spy,
  And hell's black horrors swim before my eye."

  To him Apollo: "Be no more dismay'd;
  See, and be strong! the Thunderer sends thee aid.
  Behold! thy Phoebus shall his arms employ,
  Phoebus, propitious still to thee and Troy.
  Inspire thy warriors then with manly force,
  And to the ships impel thy rapid horse:
  Even I will make thy fiery coursers way,
  And drive the Grecians headlong to the sea."

  Thus to bold Hector spoke the son of Jove,
  And breathed immortal ardour from above.
  As when the pamper'd steed, with reins unbound,
  Breaks from his stall, and pours along the ground;
  With ample strokes he rushes to the flood,
  To bathe his sides, and cool his fiery blood;
  His head, now freed, he tosses to the skies;
  His mane dishevell'd o'er his shoulders flies:
  He snuffs the females in the well-known plain,
  And springs, exulting, to his fields again:
  Urged by the voice divine, thus Hector flew,
  Full of the god; and all his hosts pursue.
  As when the force of men and dogs combined
  Invade the mountain goat, or branching hind;
  Far from the hunter's rage secure they lie
  Close in the rock, (not fated yet to die)
  When lo! a lion shoots across the way!
  They fly: at once the chasers and the prey.
  So Greece, that late in conquering troops pursued,
  And mark'd their progress through the ranks in blood,
  Soon as they see the furious chief appear,
  Forget to vanquish, and consent to fear.

  Thoas with grief observed his dreadful course,
  Thoas, the bravest of the Ćush'd at the bank: down sank the enormous mound:
  Roll'd in the ditch the heapy ruin lay;
  A sudden road! a long and ample way.
  O'er the dread fosse (a late impervious space)
  Now steeds, and men, and cars tumultuous pass.
  The wondering crowds the downward level trod;
  Before them flamed the shield, and march'd the god.
  Then with his hand he shook the mighty wall;
  And lo! the turrets nod, the bulwarks fall:
  Easy as when ashore an infant stands,
  And draws imagined houses in the sands;
  The sportive wanton, pleased with some new play,
  Sweeps the slight works and fashion'd domes away:
  Thus vanish'd at thy touch, the towers and walls;
  The toil of thousands in a moment falls.

  The Grecians gaze around with wild despair,
  Confused, and weary all the powers withfire, nor that defend:
  One kept the shore, and one the vessel trod;
  That fix'd as fate, this acted by a god.
  The son of Clytius in his daring hand,
  The deck approae;
  By Hector here the Phocian Schedius died;
  There, pierced by Ajax, sunk Laodamas,
  Chief of the foot, of old Antenor's race.
  Polydamas laid Otus on the sand,
  The fierce commander of the Epeian band.
  His lance bold Meges at the victor threw;
  The victor, stooping, from the death withdrew;
  (That valued life, O Phoebus! was thy care)
  But Croesmus' bosom took the flying spear:
  His corpse fell bleeding on the slippery shore;
  His radiant arms triumphant Meges bore.
  Dolops, the son of Lampus, rushes on,
  Sprung from the race of old Laomedon,
  And famed for prowess in a well-fought field,
  He pierced the centre of his sounding shield:
  But Meges, Phyleus' ample breastplate wore,
  (Well-known in fight on Selle's winding shore;
  For king Euphetes gave the golden mail,
  Compact, and firm with many a jointed scale)
  Which oft, in cities storm'd, and battles won,
  Had saved the father, and now saves the son.
  Full at the Trojan's head he urged his lance,
  Where the high plumes above the helmet dance,
  New ting'd with Tyrian dye: in dust below,
  Shorn from the crest, the purple honours glow.
  Meantime their fight the Spartan king survey'd,
  And stood by Meges' side a sudden aid.
  Through Dolops' shoulder urged his forceful dart,
  Which held its passage through the panting heart,
  And issued at his breast. With thundering sound
  The warrior falls, extended on the ground.
  In rush the conquering Greeks to spoil the slain:
  But Hector's voice excites his kindred train;
  The hero most, from Hicetaon sprung,
  Fierce Melanippus, gallant, brave, and young.
  He (ere to Troy the Grecians cross'd the main)
  Fed his large oxen on Percote's plain;
  But when oppress'd, his country claim'd his care,
  Return'd to Ilion, and excell'd in war;
  For this, in Priam's court, he held his place,
  Beloved no less than Priam's royal race.
  Him Hector singled, as his troops he led,
  And thus inflamed him, pointing to the dead.

  "Lo, Melanippus! lo, where Dolops lies;
  And is it thus our royal kinsman dies?
  O'ermatch'd he falls; to two at once a prey,
  And lo! they bear the bloody arms away!
  Come on--a distant war no longer wage,
  But hand to hand thy country's foes engage:
  Till Greece at once, and all her glory end;
  Or Ilion from her towery height descend,
  Heaved from the lowest stone; and bury all
  In one sad sepulchre, one common fall."

  Hector (this said) rush'd forward on the foes:
  Wi
  So fears the youth; all Troy with shouts pursue,
  While stones and darts in mingled tempest flew;
  But enter'd in the Grecian ranks, he turns
  His manly breast, and with new fury burns.

  Now on the fleet the tides of Trojans drove,
  Fierce to fulfil the stern decrees of Jove:
  The sire of gods, confirming Thetis' prayer,
  The Grecian ardour quench'd in deep despair;
  But lifts to glory Troy's prevailing bands,
  Swells all their hearts, and strengthens all their hands.
  On Ida's top he waits with longing eyes,
  To view the navy blazing to the skies;
  Then, nor till then, the scale of war shall turn,
  The Trojans fly, and conquer'd Ilion burn.
  These fates revolved in his almighty mind,
  He raises Hector to the work design'd,
  Bids him with more than mortal fury glow,
  And drives him, like a lightning, on the foe.
  So Mars, when human crimes for vengeance call,
  Shakes his huge javelin, and whole armies fall.
  Not with more rage a conflagration rolls,
  Wraps the vast mountains, and involves the poles.
  He foams with wrath; beneath his gloomy brow
  Like fiery meteors his red eye-balls glow:
  The radiant helmet on his temple burns,
  Waves when he nods, and lightens as he turns:
  For Jove his splendour round the chief had thrown,
  And cast the blaze of both the hosts on one.
  Unhappy glories! for his fate was near,
  Due to stern Pallas, and Pelides' spear:
  Yet Jove deferr'd the death he was to pay,
  And gave what fate allow'd, the honours of a day!

  Now all on fire for fame, his breast, his eyes
  Burn at each foe, and single every prize;
  Still at the closest ranks, the thickest fight,
  He points his ardour, ano that he flies;
  Admiring numbers follow with their eyes.

  From ship to ship thus Ajax swiftly flew,
  No less the wonder of the warring crew.
  As furious, Hector thunder'd threats aloud,
  And rush'd enraged before the Trojan crowd;
  Then swift invades the ships, whose beaky prores
  Lay rank'd contiguous on the bending shores;
  So the strong eagle from his airy height,
  Who marks the swans' or cranes' embodied flight,
  Stoops down impetuous, while they light for food,
  And, stooping, darkens with his wings the flood.
  Jove leads him on with his almighty hand,
  And breathes fierce spirits in his following band.
  The warring nations meet, the battle roars,
  Thick beats the combat on the sounding prores.
  Thou wouldst have thought, so furious was their fire,
  No force could tame them, and no toil could tire;
  As if new vigour from new fights they won,
  And the long battle was but then begun.
  Greece, yet unconquer'd, kept alive the war,
  Secure of death, confiding in despair:
  Troy in proud hopes already view'd the main
  Bright with the blaze, and red with heroes slain:
  Like strength is felt from hope, and from despair,
  And each contends, as his were all the war.

  "Twas thou, bold Hector! whose resistless hand
  First seized a ship on that contested strand;
  The same which dead Protesilaus bore,(242)
  The first that touch'd the unhappy Trojan shore:
  For this in arms the warring nations stood,
  And bathed their generous breasts with mutual blood.
  No room to poise the lance or bend the bow;
  Than thou hast mine! Oh tel!
  Thy country slighted in her last distress,
  What friend, what man, from thee shall hope redress?
  No--men unborn, and ages yet behind,
  Shall curse that fierce, that unforgiving mind.

  "O man unpitying! if of man thy race;
  But sure thou spring'st not from a soft embrace,
  Nor ever amorous hero caused thy birth,
  Nor ever tender goddess brought thee forth:
  Some rugged rock's hard entrails gave thee form,
  And raging seas produced thee in a storm,
  A soul well suiting that tempestuous kind,
  So rough thy manners, so untamed thy mind.

  "If some dire oracle thy breast alarm,
  If aught from Jove, or Thetis, stop thy arm,
  Some beam of comfort yet on Greece may shine,
  If I but lead the Myrmidonian line:
  Clad in thy dreadful arms if I appear,
  Proud Troy shall tremble, and desert the war;
  Without thy person Greece shall win the day,
  And thy mere image chase her foes away.
  Press'd by fresh forces, her o'erlabour'd train
  Shall quit the ships, and Greece respire again."
  Thus, blind to fate! with supplicating breath,
  Thou begg'st his arms, and in his arms thy death.
  Unfortunately good! a boding sigh
  Thy friend return'd; and with it, this reply:
  "Patroclus! thy Achilles knows no fears;
  Nor words from Jove nor oracles he hears;
  Nor aught a mother's caution can suggest;
  The tyrant's pride lies rooted in my breast.
  My wrongs, my wrongs, my constant thought engage,
  Those, my sole oracles, inspire my rage:
  I made him tyrant: gave him power to wrong
  Even my: I felt it; and shall feel it long.
  The maid, my black-eyed maid, he forced away,
  Due to the toils of many a well-fought day;
  Due to my conquest of her father's reign;
  Due to the votes of all the Grecian train.
  From me he forced her; me, the bold and brave,
  Disgraced, dishonour'd, like the meanest slave.
  But bear we this--the wrongs I grieve are past;
  'Tis time our fury should relent at last:
  I fix'd its date; the day I wish'd appears:
  How Hechiefs; while on the strand
  Great Jove with conquest crown'd the Trojan band.
  Ajax no more the sounding storm sustain'd,
  So thick the darts an iron tempest rain'd:
  On his tired arm the weighty buckler hung;
  His hollow helm with falling javelins rung;
  His breath, in quick short pantings, comes and goes;
  And painful sweat from all his members flows.
  Spent and o'erpower'd, he barely breathes at most;
  Yet scarce an army stirs him from his post;
  Dangers on dangers all around him glow,
  And toil to toil, and woe succeeds to woe.

  Say, Muses, throned above the starry frame,
  How first the navy blazed with Trojan flame?

  Stern Hector waved his sword, and standing near,
  Where furious Ajax plied his ashen spear,
  Full on the lance a stroke so justly sped,
  That the broad falchion lopp'd its brazen head;
  His pointless spear the warrior shakes in vain;
  The brazen head falls sounding on the plain.
  Great Ajax saw, and own'd the hand divine;
  Confessing Jove, and trembling at the sign,
  Warn'd he retreats. Then swift from all sides pour
  The hissing brands; thick streams the fiery shower;
  O'er the high stern the curling volumes rise,
  And sheets of rolling smoke involve the skies.

  Divine Achilles view'd the rising flames,
  And smote his thigh, and thus aloud exclaims:
  "Arm, arm, Patroclus! Lo, the blaze aspires!
  The glowing ocean reddens with the fires.
  Arm, ere our vessels catch the spreading flame;
  Arm, ere the Grecians be no more a name;
  I haste to bring the troops."--The hero said;
  The friend with ardour and with joy obey'd.

  He cased his limbs in brass; and first around
  His manly legs, with silver buckles bound
  The clasping greaves; then to his breast applies
  The flaming cuirass of a thousand dyes;
  Emblazed with studs of gold his falchion shone
  In the rich belt, as in a starry zone:
  Achilles' shield his ample shoulders spread,
  Achilles' helmet nodded o'er his head:
  Adorn'd in all his terriblesander follow'd; matchless in his art
  To wing the spear, or aim the distant dart;
  No hand so sure of all the Emathian line,
  Or if a surer, great Patroclus! thine.

  The fourth by Phoenix' grave command was graced,
  Laerces' valiant offspring led the last.

  Soon as Achilles with superior care
  Had call'd the chiefs, and order'd all the war,
  This stern remembrance to his troops he gave:
  "Ye far-famed Myrmidons, ye fierce and brave!
  Think with what threats you dared the Trojan throng,
  Think what reproach these ears endured so long;
  'Stern son of Peleus, (thus ye used to say,
  While restless, raging, in your ships you lay)
  Oh nursed with gall, unknowing how to yield;
  Whose rage defrauds us of so famed a field:
  If that dire fury must for ever burn,
  What make we here? Return, ye chiefs, return!'
  Such were your words--Now, warriors! grieve no more,
  Lo there the Trojans; bathe your swords in gore!
  This day shall give you all your soul demands,
  Glut all your hearts, and weary all your hands!"

                          [Illustration: DIANA.]

                                  DIANA.


  Thus while he roused the fire in every breast,
  Close and more close the listening cohorts press'd;
  Ranks wedged in ranks; of arms a steely ring
  Still grows, and spreads, and thickens round the king.
  As when a circling wall the builder forms,
  Of strength defensive against wind and storms,
  Compacted stones the thickening work compose,
  And round him wide the rising structure grows:
  So helm to helm, and crest to crest they throng,
  Shield urged on shield, and man drove man along;
  Thick, undistinguish'd plumes, together join'd,
  Float in one sea, and wave before the wind.

  Far o'er the rest in glittering pomp appear,
  There bold Automedon, Patroclus here;
  Brothers in arms, with equal fury fired;
  Two friends, two bodies with one soul inspired.

  But mindful of the gods, Achilles went
  To the rich coffer in his shady tent;
  There lay on heaps his various garments roll'd,
  And costly furs, and carpets stiff with gold,
  (The presents of the silver-footed dame)
  From thence he took a bowl, of antique frame,
  Which never man had stained with ruddy wine,
  Nor raised in offerings to the power divine,
  But Peleus' son; and Peleus' son to none
  Had raised in offerings, but to Jove alone.
  This tinged with sulphur, sacred first to flame,
  He purged; and wash'd it in the running stream.
  Then cleansed his hands; and fixing for a space
  His eyes on heaven, his feet upon the place
  Of sacrifice, the purple draught he pour'd
  Forth in the midst; and thus the god implored:

  "O thou supreme! high-throned all height above!
  O great Pelasgic, Dodonaean Jove!
  Who 'midst surrounding frosts, and vapours chill,
  Presid'st on bleak Dodona's vocal hill:
  (Whose groves the Selli, race austere! surround,
  Their fee  At once they see, they tremble, and they fly.

  Then first thy spear, divine Patroclus! flew,
  Where the war raged, and where the tumult grew.
  Close to the stern of that famed ship which bore
  Unbless'd Protesilaus to Ilion's shore,
  The great Paeonian, bold Pyrechmes stood;
  (Who led his bands from Axius' winding flood;)
  His shoulder-blade receives the fatal wound;
  The groaning warrior pants upon the ground.
  His troops, that see their country's glory slain,
  Fly diverse, scatter'd o'er the distant plain.
  Patroclus' arm forbids the spreading fires,
  And from the half-burn'd ship proud Troy retires;
  Clear'd from the smoke the joyful navy lies;
  In heaps on heaps the foe tumultuous flies;
  Triumphant Greece her rescued decks ascends,
  And loud acclaim the starry region rends.
  So when thick clouds enwrap the mountain's head,
  O'er heaven's expanse like one black ceiling spread;
  Sudden the Thunderer, with a flashing ray,
  Bursts through the darkness, and lets down the day:
  The hills shine out, the rocks in prospect rise,
  And streams, and vales, and forests, strike the eyes;
  The smiling scene wide opens to the sight,
  And all the unmeasured ether flames with light.

  But Troy repulsed, and scatter'd o'er the plains,
  Forced from the navy, yet the fight maintains.
  Now every Greek some hostile hero slew,
  But still the foremost, bold Patroclus flew:
  As Areilycus had turn'd him round,
  Sharp in his thigh he felt the piercing wound;
  The brazen-pointed spear, with vigour thrown,
  The thigh transfix'd, and broke the brittle bone:
  Headlong he fell. Next, Thoas was thy chance;
  Thy breast, unarm'd, received the Spartan lance.
  Phylides' dart (as Amphidus drew nigh)
  His blow prevented, and transpierced his thigh,
  Tore all the brawn, and rent the nerves away;
  In darkness, and in death, the warrior lay.

  In equal arms two sons of Nestor stand,
  And two bold brothers of the Lycian band:
  By great Antilochus, Atymnwolves the unguarded charge survey,
  And rend the trembling, unresisting prey:
  Thus on the foe the Greeks impetuous came;
  Troy fled, unmindful of her former fame.

  But still at Hector godlike Ajax aim'd,
  Still, pointed at his breast, his javelin flamed.
  The Trojan chief, experienced in the field,
  O'er his broad shoulders spread the massy shield,
  Observed the storm of darts the Grecians pour,
  And on his buckler caught the ringing shower:
  He sees for Greece the scale of conquest rise,
  Yet stops, and turns, and saves his loved allies.

  As when the hand of Jove a tempest forms,
  And rolls the cloud to blacken heaven with storms,
  Dark o'er the fields the ascending vapour flies,
  And shades the sun, and blots the golden skies:
  So from the ships, along the dusky plain,
  Dire Flight and Terror drove the Trojan train.
  Even Hector fled; through heads of disarray
  The fiery coursers forced their lord away:
  While far behind his Trojans fall confused;
  Wedged in the trench, in one vast carnage bruised:
  Chariots on chariots roll: the clashing spokes
  Shock; while the madding steeds break short their yokes.
  In vain they labour up the steepy mound;
  Their charioteers lie foaming on the ground.
  Fierce on the rear, with shouts Patroclus flies;
  Tumultuous clamour fills the fields and skies;
  Thick drifts of dust involve their rapid flight;
  Clouds rise on clouds, and heaven is snatch'd from sight.
  The affrighted steeds their dying lords cast down,
  Scour o'er the fields, and stretch to reach the town.
  Loud o'er the rout was heard the victor's cry,
  Where the war bleeds, and where the thickest die,
  Where horse and arms, and chariots he o'erthrown,
  And bleeding heroes under axles groan.
  No stop, no check, the steeds of Peleus knew:
  From bank to bank the immortal coursers flew.
  High-bounding o'er the fosse, the whirling car
  Smokes through the ranks, o'ertakes the flying war,
  And thunders after Hector; Hector flies,
  The breathless body to his native land.
  His friends and people, to his future praise,
  A marble tomb and pyramid shall raise,
  And lasting honours to his ashes give;
  His fame ('tis all the dead can have) shall live."

  She said: the cloud-compeller, overcome,
  Assents to fate, and ratifies the doom.
  Then touch'd with grief, the weeping heavens distill'd
  A shower of blood o'er all the fatal field:
  The god, his eyes averting from the plain,
  Laments his son, predestined to be slain,
  Far from the Lycian shores, his happy native reign.
  Now met in arms, the combatants appear;
  Each heaved the shield, and poised the lifted spear;
  From strong Patroclus' hand the javelin fled,
  And pass'd the groin of valiant Thrasymed;
  The nerves unbraced no more his bulk sustain,
  He falls, and falling bites the bloody plain.
  Two sounding darts the Lycian leader threw:
  The first aloof with erring fury flew,
  The next transpierced Achilles' mortal steed,
  The generous Pedasus of Theban breed:
  Fix'd in the shoulder's joint, he reel'd around,
  Roll'd in the bloody dust, and paw'd the slippery ground.
  His sudden fall the entangled harness broke;
  Each axle crackled, and the chariot shook:
  When bold Automedon, to disengage
  The starting coursers, and restrain their rage,
  Divides the traces with his sword, and freed
  The encumbered chariot from the dying steed:
  The rest move on, obedient to the rein:
  The car rolls slowly o'er the dusty plain.

  The towering chiefs to fiercer fight advance:
  And first Sarpedon whirl'd his weighty lance,
  Which o'er the warrior's shoulder took its course,
  And spent in empty air its dying force.
  Not so Patroclus' never-erring dart;
  Aim'd at his breast it pierced a mortal part,
  Where the strong fibres bind the solid heart.
  Then as the mountain oak, or poplar tall,
  Or pine (fit mast for some great admiral)
  Nods to t
  Or weigh the great occasion, and be more.
  The chief who taught our lofty walls to yield,
  Lies pale in death, extended on the field.
  To guard his body Troy in numbers flies;
  Tis half the glory to maintain our prize.
  Haste, strip his arms, the slaughter round him spread,
  And send the living Lycians to the dead."

  The heroes kindle at his fierce command;
  The martial squadrons close on either hand:
  Here Troy and Lycia charge with loud alarms,
  Thessalia there, and Greece, oppose their arms.
  With horrid shouts they circle round the slain;
  The clash of armour rings o'er all the plain.
  Great Jove, to swell the horrors of the fight,
  O'er the fierce armies pours pernicious night,
  And round his son confounds the warring hosts,
  His fate ennobling with a crowd of ghosts.

  Now Greece gives way, and great Epigeus falls;
  Agacleus' son, from Budium's lofty walls;
  Who chased for murder thence a suppliant came
  To Peleus, and the silver-footed dame;
  Now sent to Troy'd in dancing to dispute the prize,
  My spear, the destined passage had it found,
  Had fix'd thy active vigour to the ground."

  "O valiant leader of the Dardan host!
  (Insulted Merion thus retorts the boast)
  Strong as you are, 'tis mortal force you trust,
  An arm as strong may stretch thee in the dust.
  And if to this my lance thy fate be given,
  Vain are thy vaunts; success is still from heaven:
  This, instant, sends thee down to Pluto's coast;
  Mine is the glory, his thy parting ghost."

  "O friend (Menoetius' son this answer gave)
  With words to combat, ill befits the brave;
  Not empty boasts the sons of Troy repel,
  Your swords must plunge them to the shades of hell.
  To speak, beseems the council; but to dare
  In glorious action, is the task of war."

  This said, Patroclus to the battle flies;
  Great Merion follows, and new shouts arise:
  Shields, helmets rattle, as the warriors close;
  And thick and heavy sounds the storm of blows.
  As through the shrilling vale, or mountain ground,
  The labours of the woodman's axe resound;
  Blows following blows are heard re-echoing wide,
  While crackling forests fall on every side:
  Thus echoed all the fields with loud alarms,
  So fell the warriors, and so rung their arms.

  Now great Sarpedon on the sandy shore,
  His heavenly form defaced with dust and gore,
  And stuck with darts by warring heroes shed,
  Lies undistinguish'd from the vulgar dead.
  His long-disputed corse the chiefs enclose,
  On every side the busy combat grows;
  Thick as beneath some shepherd's thatch'd abode
  (The pails high foaming with a milky flood)
  The buzzing flies, a persevering train,
  Incessant swarm, and chased return again.

  Jove view'd the combat with a stern survey,
  And eyes that flash'd intolerable day.
  Fix'd on the field his sight, his breast debates
  The vengeance due, and meditates the fates:
  Whether to urge their prompt effect, and call
  The force of Hector to Patroclus' fall,
  vest;
  And with perfumes of sweet ambrosial dews
  Restores his freshness, and his form renews.
  Then Sleep and Death, two twins of winged race,
  Of matchless swiftness, but of silent pace,
  Received Sarpedon, at the god's command,
  And in a moment reach'd the Lycian land;
  The corse amidst his weeping friends they laid,
  Where endless honours wait the sacred shade.

  Meanwhile Patroclus pours along the plains,
  With foaming coursers, and with loosen'd reins.
  Fierce on the Trojan and the Lycian crew,
  Ah blind to fate! thy headlong fury flew
  Against what fate and powerful Jove ordain,
  Vain was thyre thine my vigour this successful spear
  Should soon convince thee of so false a fear.
  Turn thee, ah turn thee to the field of fame,
  And in Patroclus' blood efface thy shame.
  Perhaps Apollo shall thy arms succeed,
  And heaven ordains him by thy lance to bleed."

  So spoke the inspiring god; then took his flight,
  And plunged amidst the tumult of the fight.
  He bids Cebrion drive the rapid car;
  The lash resounds, the coursers rush to war.
  The god the Grecians' sinking souls depress'd,
  And pour'd swift spirits through each Trojan breast.
  Patroclus lights, impatient for the fight;
  A spear his left, a stone employs his right:
  With all his nerves he drives it at the foe.
  Pointed above, and rough and gross below:
  The falling ruin crush'd Cebrion's head,
  The lawless offspring of king Priam's bed;
  His front, brows, eyes, one undistinguish'd wound:
  The bursting balls drop sightless to the ground.
  The charioteer, while yet he held the rein,
  Struck from the car, falls headlong on the plain.
  To the dark shades the soul unwilling glides,
  While the proud victor thus his fall derides.

  "Good heaven! what active feats yon artist shows!
  What skilful divers are our Phrygian foes!
  Mark with what ease they sink into the sand!
  Pity that all their practice is by land!"

  Then rushing sudden on his prostrate prize,
  To spoil the carcase fierce Patroclus flies:
  Swift as a lion, terrible and bold,
  That sweeps the field, depopulates the fold;
  Pierced through the dauntless heart, then tumbles slain,
  And from his fatal courage finds his bane.
  At once bold Hector leaping from his car,
  Defends the body, and provokes the war.
  Thus for some slaughter'd hind, with equal rage,
  Two lordly rulers of the wood engage;
  Stung with fierce hunger, each the prey invades,
  And echoing roars rebellow through the shades.
  Stern Hector fastens on the warrior's head,
  And by the foot Patroclus drags the dead:
  While all around, conAnd shade the temples of the mad divine.
  Jove dooms it now on Hector's helm to nod;
  Not long--for fate pursues him, and the god.

  His spear in shivers falls; his ample shield
  Drops from his arm: his baldric strows the field:
  The corslet his astonish'd breast forsakes:
  Loose is each joint; each nerve with horror shakes;
  Stupid he stares, and all-assistless stands:
  Such is the force of more than mortal hands!

  A Dardan youth there was, well known to fame,
  From Panthus sprung, Euphorbus was his name;
  Famed for the manage of the foaming horse,
  Skill'd in the dart, and matchless in the course:
  Full twenty knights he tumbled from the car,
  While yet he learn'd his rudiments of war.
  His venturous spear first drew the hero's gore;
  He struck, he wounded, but he durst no more.
  Nor, though disarm'd, Patroclus' fury stood:
  But swift withdrew the long-protended wood.
  And turn'd him short, and herded in the crowd.
  Thus, by an arm divine, and mortal spear,
  Wounded, at once, Patroclus yields to fear,
  Retires for succour to his social train,
  And flies the fate, which heaven decreed, in vain.
  Stern Hector, as the bleeding chief he views,
  Breaks through the ranks, and his retreat pursues:
  The lance arrests him with a mortal wound;
  He falls, earth thunders, and his arms resound.
  With him all Greece was sunk; that moment all
  Her yet-surviving heroes seem'd to fall.
  So, scorch'd with heat, along the desert score,
  The roaming lion meets a bristly boar,
  Fast by the spring; they both dispute the flood,
  With flaming eyes, and jaws besmear'd with blood;
  At length the sovereign savage wins the strife;
  And the torn boar resigns his thirst and life.
  Patroclus thus, so many chiefs o'erthrown,
  So many lives effused, expires his own.
  As dying now at Hector's feet he lies,
  He sternly views him, and triumphant cries:

  "Lie there, Patroclus! and with thee, the joy
  Thy pride once promised, of subverting Troy;
  Th the distant plains,
  Far from his rage the immortal coursers drove;
  The immortal coursers were the gift of Jove.

                       [Illustration: ĆSCULAPIUS.]

                               ĆSCULAPIUS.





BOOK XVII.


ARGUMENT.

THE SEVENTH BATTLE, FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.--THE ACTS OF MENELAUS.

Menelaus, upon the death of Patroclus, defends his body from the enemy:
Euphorbus, who attempts it, is slain. Hector advancing, Menelaus retires;
but soon returns with Ajax, and drives him off. This, Glaucus objects to
Hector as a flight, who thereupon puts on the armour he had won from
Patroclus, and renews the battle. The Greeks give way, till Ajax rallies
them: Aeneas sustains the Trojans. Aeneas and Hector Attempt the chariot
of Achilles, which is borne off by Automedon. The horses of Achilles
deplore the loss of Patroclus: Jupiter covers his body with a thick
darkness: the noble prayer of Ajax on that occasion. Menelaus sends
Antilochus to Achilles, with the news of Patroclus' death: then returns to
the fight, where, though attacked with the utmost fury, he and Meriones,
assisted by the Ajaces, bear off the body to the ships.

The time is the evening of the eight-and-twentieth day. The scene lies in
the fields before Troy.

  On the cold earth divine Patroclus spread,
  Lies pierced with wounds among the vulgar dead.
  Great Menelaus, touch'd with generous woe,
  Springs to the front, and guards him from the foe.
  Thus round her new-fallen young the heifer moves,
  Fruit of her throes, and first-born of her loves;
  And anxious (helpless as he lies, and bare)
  Turns, and re-turns her, with a mother's care,
  Opposed to each that near the carcase came,
  His broad shield glimmers, and his lances flame.

  The son of Panthus, skill'd the dart to send,
  Eyes the dead hero, and insults the friend.
  "This hand, Atrides, laid Patroclus low;
  Warrior! desist, nor tempt an equal blow:
  To me the spoils my prowess won, resign:
  Depart withess speed to chase
  Achilles' coursers, of ethereal race;
  They stoop not, these, to mortal man's command,
  Or stoop to none but great Achilles' hand.
  Too long amused with a pursuit so vain,
  Turn, and behold the brave Euphorbus slain;
  By Sparta
  Had sunk each heart with terror and dismay.

  To him the king: "Oh Ajax, oh my friend!
  Haste, and Patroclus' loved remains defend:
  The body to Achilles to restore
  Demands our care; alas, we can no more!
  For naked now, despoiled of arms, he lies;
  And Hector glories in the dazzling prize."
  He said, and touch'd his heart. The raging pair
  Pierced the thick battle, and provoke the war.
  Already had stern Hector seized his head,
  And doom'd to Trojan gods the unhappy dead;
  But soon as Ajax rear'd his tower-like shield,
  Sprung to his car, and measured back the field,
  His train to Troy the radiant armour bear,
  To stand a trophy of his fame in war.

  Meanwhile great Ajax (his broad shield display'd)
  Guards the dead hero with the dreadful shade;
  And now before, and now behind he stood:
  Thus in the centre of some gloomy wood,
  With many a step, the lioness surrounds
  Her tawny young, beset by men and hounds;
  Elate her heart, and rousing all her powers,
  Dark o'er the fiery balls each hanging eyebrow lours.
  Fast by his side the generous Spartan glows
  With great revenge, and feeds his inward woes.

  But Glaucus, leader of the Lycian aids,
  On Hector frowning, thus his flight upbraids:

  "Where now in Hector shall we Hector find?
  A manly form, without a manly mind.
  Is this, O chief! a hero's boasted fame?
  How vain, without the merit, is the name!
  Since battle is renounced, thy thoughts employ
  What other methods may preserve thy Troy:
  'Tis time to try if Ilion's state can stand
  By thee alone, nor ask a foreign hand:
  Mean, empty boast! but shall the Lycians stake
  Their lives for you? those Lycians you forsake?
  What from thy thankless arms can we expect?
  Thy friend Sarpedon proves thy base negler part.
  Thou from the mighty dead those arms hast torn,
  Which once the greatest of mankind had worn.
  Yet live! I give thee one illustrious day,
  A blaze of glory ere thou fad'st away.
  For ah! no more Andromache shall come
  With joyful tears to welcome Hector home;
  No more officious, with endearing charms,
  From thy tired limbs unbrace Pelides' arms!"

  Then with his sable brow he gave the nod
  That seals his word; the sanction of the god.
  The stubborn arms (by Jove's command disposed)
  Conform'd spontaneous, and around him closed:
  Fill'd with the god, enlarged his members grew,
  Through all his veins a sudden vigour flew,
  The blood in brisker tides began to roll,
  And Mars himself came rushing on his soul.
  Exhorting loud through all the field he strode,
  And look'd, and moved, Achilles, or a god.
  Now Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, he inspires,
  Now Phorcys, Chromius, and Hippothous fires;
  The great Thersilochus like fury found,
  Asteropaeus kindled at the sound,
  And Ennomus, in augury renown'd.

  "Hear, all ye hosts, and hear, unnumber'd bands
  Of neighbouring nations, or of distant lands!
  'Twas not for state we summon'd you so far,
  To boast our numbers, and the pomp of war:
  Ye came to fight; a valiant foe to chase,
  To save our present, and our future race.
  Tor this, our wealth, our products, you enjoy,
  And glean the relics of exhausted Troy.
  Now then, to conquer or to die prepare;
  To die or conquer are the terms of war.
  Whatever hand shall win Patroclus slain,
  Whoe'er shall drag him to the Trojan train,
  With Hector's self shall equal honours claim;
  With Hector part the spoil, and share the fame."

  Fired by his words, the troops dismiss their fears,
  They join, they thicken, they protend their spears;
  Full on the Greeks they drive in firm array,
  And each from Ajax hopes the glorious prey:
  Vain hope! what numbers shall the field o'erspread,
  What victims perish round the mighty dead!

  Grm side to side,
  The river trembles to his utmost shore,
  And distant rocks re-bellow to the roar.

  Nor less resolved, the firm Achaian band
  With brazen shields in horrid circle stand.
  Jove, pouring darkness o'er the mingled fight,
  Conceals the warriors' shining helms in night:
  To him, the chief for whom the hosts contend
  Had lived not hateful, for he lived a friend:
  Dead he protects him with superior care.
  Nor dooms his carcase to the birds of air.

             [Illustration: FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.]

                     FIGHT FOR THE BODY OF PATROCLUS.


  The first attack the Grecians scarce sustain,
  Repulsed, they yield; the Trojans seize the slain.
  Then fierce they rally, to revenge led on
  By the swift rage of Ajax Telamon.
  (Ajax to Peleus' son the second name,
  In graceful stature next, and next in fame)
  With headlong force the foremost ranks he tore;
  So through the thicket bursts the mountain boar,
  And rudely scatters, for a distance round,
  The frighted hunter and the baying hound.
  The son of Lethus, brave Pelasgus' heir,
  Hippothous, dragg'd the carcase through the war;
  The sinewy ankles bored, the feet he bound
  With thongs inserted through the double wound:
  Inevitable fate o'ertakes the deed;
  Doom'd by great Ajax' vengeful lance to bleed:
  It cleft the helmet's brazen cheeks in twain;
  The shatter'd crest and horse-hair strow the plain:
  With nerves relax'd he tumbles to the ground:
  The brain comes gushing through the ghastly wound:
  He dro  Ćneas through the form assumed descries
  The power conceal'd, and thus to Hector cries:
  "Oh lasting shame! to our own fears a prey,
  We seek our ramparts, and desert the day.
  A god, nor is he less, my bosom warms,
  And tells me, Jove asserts the Trojan arms."

  He spoke, and foremost to the combat flew:
  The bold example all his hosts pursue.
  Then, first, Leocritus beneath him bled,
  In vain beloved by valiant Lycomede;
  Who view'd his fall, and, grieving at the chance,
  Swift to revenge it sent his angry lance;
  The whirling lance, with vigorous force address'd,
  Descends, and pants in Apisaon's breast;
  From rich Paeonia's vales the warrior came,
  Next thee, Asteropeus! in place and fame.
  Asteropeus with grief beheld the slain,
  And rush'd to combat, but he rush'd in vain:
  Indissolubly firm, around the dead,
  Rank within rank, on buckler buckler spread,
  And hemm'd with bristled spears, the Grecians stood,
  A brazen bulwark, and an iron wood.
  Great Ajax eyes them with incessant care,
  And in an orb contracts the crowded war,
  Close in their ranks commands to fight or fall,
  And stands the centre and the soul of all:
  Fix'd on the spot they war, and wounded, wound
  A sanguine torrent steeps the reeking ground:
  On heaps the Greeks, on heaps the Trojans bled,
  And, thickening round them, rise the hills of dead.

  Greece, in close order, and collected might,
  Yet suffers least, and sways the wavering fight;
  Fierce as conflicting fires the combat burns,
  And now it rises, now it sinks by turns.
  In one thick darkness all the fight was lost;
  The sun, the moon, and all the ethereal host
  Seem'd as extinct: day ravish'd from their eyes,
  And all heaven's splendours blotted from the skies.
  Such o'er Patroclus' body hung the night,
  The rest in sunshine fought, and open light;
  Unclouded there, the aerial azure spread,
  No vapour rested on the mountain's head,
  The golden sun pour'd forth a stronger ray,
  And "

  Thus they: while with one voice the Trojans said,
  "Grant this day, Jove! or heap us on the dead!"

  Then clash their sounding arms; the clangours rise,
  And shake the brazen concave of the skies.

  Meantime, at distance from the scene of blood,
  The pensive steeds of great Achilles stood:
  Their godlike master slain before their eyes,
  They wept, and shared in human miseries.(248)
  In vain Automedon now shakes the rein,
  Now plies the lash, and soothes and threats in vain;
  Nor to the fight nor Hellespont they go,
  Restive they stood, and obstinate in woe:
  Still as a tombstone, never to be moved,
  On some good man or woman unreproved
  Lays its eternal weight; or fix'd, as stands
  A marble courser by the sculptor's hands,
  Placed on the hero's grave. Along their face
  The big round drops coursed down with silent pace,
  Conglobing on the dust.f inferior birth,
  That breathes or creeps upon the dust of earth;
  What wretched creature of what wretched kind,
  Than man more weak, calamitous, and blind?
  A miserable race! but cease to mourn:
  For not by you shall Priam's son be borne
  High on the splendid car: one glorious prize
  He rashly boasts: the rest our will denies.
  Ourself will swiftness to your nerves impart,
  Ourself with rising spirits swell your heart.
  Automedon your rapid flight shall bear
  Safe to the navy through the storm of war.
  For yet 'tis given to Troy to ravage o'er
  The field, and spread her slaughters to the shore;
  The sun shall see her conquer, till his fall
  With sacred darkness shades the face of all."

  He said; and breathing in the immortal horse
  Excessive spirit, urged them to the course;
  From their high manes they shake the dust, and bear
  The kindling chariot through the parted war:
  So flies a vulture through the clamorous train
  Of geese, that scream, and scatter round the plain.
  From danger now with swiftest speed they flew,
  And now to conquest with like speed pursue;
  Sole in the seat the charioteer remains,
  Now plies the javelin, now directs the reins:
  Him brave Alcimedon beheld distress'd,
  Approach'd the chariot, and the chief address'd:

  "What goyes;
  No Greek like him the heavenly steeds restrains,
  Or holds their fury in suspended reins:
  Patroclus, while he lived, their rage could tame,
  But now Patroclus is an empty name!
  To thee I yield the seat, to thee resign
  The ruling charge: the task of fight be mine."

  He said. Alcimedon, with active heat,
  Snatches the reins, and vaults into the seat.
  His friend descends. The chief of Troy descried,
  And call'd Ćneas fighting near his side.

  "Lo, to my sight, beyond our hope restored,
  Achilles' car, deserted of its lord!
  The glorious steeds our ready arms invite,
  Scarce their weak drivers guide them through the fight.
  Can such opponents stand 
  And calls the Ajaces from the warring crowd,
  With great Atrides. "Hither turn, (he said,)
  Turn where distress demands immediate aid;
  The dead, encircled by his friends, forego,
  And save the living from a fiercer foe.
  Unhelp'd we stand, unequal to engage
  The force of Hector, and Ćneas' rage:
  Yet mighty as they are, my force to prove
  Is only mine: the event belongs to Jove."

  He spoke, and high the sounding javelin flung,
  Which pass'd the shield of Aretus the young:
  It pierced his belt, emboss'd with curious art,
  Then in the lower belly struck the dart.
  As when a ponderous axe, descending full,
  Cleaves the broad forehead of some brawny bull:(249)
  Struck 'twixt the horns, he springs with many a bound,
  Then tumbling rolls enormous on the ground:
  Thus fell the youth; the air his soul received,
  And the spear trembled as his entrails heaved.

  Now at Automedon the Trojan foe
  Discharged his lance; the meditated blow,
  Stooping, he shunn'd; the javelin idly fled,
  And hiss'd innoxious o'er the hero's head;
  Deep rootednd rage, and lust of fight.
  So burns the vengeful hornet (soul all o'er),
  Repulsed in vain, and thirsty still of gore;
  (Bold son of air and heat) on angry wings
  Untamed, untired, he turns, attacks, and stings.
  Fired with like ardour fierce Atrides flew,
  And sent his soul with every lance he threw.

  There stood a Trojan, not unknown to fame,
  Aetion's son, and Podes was his name:
  With riches honour'd, and with courage bless'd,
  By Hector loved, his comrade, and his guest;
  Through his broad belt the spear a passage found,
  And, ponderous as he falls, his arms resound.
  Sudden at Hector's side Apollo stood,
  Like Phaenops, Asius' son, appear'd the god;
  (Asius the great, who held his wealthy reign
  In fair Abydos, by the rolling main.)

  "Oh prince! (he cried) Oh foremost once in fame!
  What Grecian now shall tremble at thy name?
  Dost thou at length to Menelaus yield,
  A chief once thought no terror of the field?
  Yet singly, now, the long-disputed prize
  He bears victorious, while our army flies:
  By the same arm illustrious Podes bled;
  The friend of Hector, unrevenged, is dead!"
  This heard, o'er Hector spreads a cloud of woe,
  Rage lifts his lance, and drives him on the foe.

  But now the Eternal shook his sable shield,
  That shaded Ide and all the subject field
  Beneath its ample verge. A rolling cloud
  Involved the mount; the thunder roar'd aloud;
  The affrighted hills from their foundations nod,
  And blaze beneath the lightnings of the god:
  At one regard of his all-seeing eye
  The vanquish'd triumph, and the victors fly.

  Then trembled Greece: the flight Peneleus led;
  For as the brave Boeotian turn'd his head
  To face the foe, Polydamas drew near,
  And razed his shoulder with a shorten'd spear:
  By Hector wounded, Leitus quits the plain,
  Pierced through the wrist; and raging with the pain,
  Grasps his once formidable lance in vain.

  As Hector follow'd, Idomen address'd
  The flaming javelin to her! hear my humble prayer:
  Dispel this cloud, the light of heaven restore;
  Give me to see, and Ajax asks no more:
  If Greece must perish, we thy will obey,
  But let us perish in the face of day!"

  With tears the hero spoke, and at his prayer
  The god relenting clear'd the clouded air;
  Forth burst the sun with all-enlightening ray;
  The blaze of armour flash'd against the day.
  "Now, now, Atrides! cast around thy sight;
  If yet Antilochus survives the fight,
  Let him to great Achilles' ear convey
  The fatal news"--Atrides hastes away.

  So turns the lion from the nightly fold,
  Though high in courage, and with hunger bold,
  Long gall'd by herdsmen, and long vex'd by hounds,
  Stiff with fatigue, and fretted sore with wounds;
  The darts fly round him from a hundred hands,
  And the red terrors of the blazing brands:
  Till late, reluctant, at the dawn of day
  Sour he departs, and quits the untasted prey,
  So moved Atrides from his dangerous place
  With weary limbs, but with unwilling pace;
  The foe, he fear'd, might yet Patroclus gain,
  And much admonish'd, much adjured his train:

  "O guard these relics to your charge consign'd,
  And bear the merits of the dead in mind;
  How skill'd he was in each obliging art;
  The mildest manners, and the gentlest heart:
  He was, alas! but fate decreed his end,
  In death a hero, as in life a friend!"

  So parts the chief; from rank to rank he flew,
  And round on all sides sent his piercing view.
  As the bold bird, endued with sharpest eye
  Of all that wings the mid aerial sky,
  The sacred eagle, from his walks above
  Looks down, and sees the distant thicket move;
  Then stoops, and sousing on the quivering hare,
  Snatches his life amid the clouds of air.
  Not with less quickness, his exerted sight
  Pass'd this and that way, through the ranks of fight:
  Till on the left the chief he sought, he found,
  Cheering his men, and spreading deaths around:

  To him the king: "Beloved ofd boar;
  But if the savage turns his glaring eye,
  They howl aloof, and round the forest fly.
  Thus on retreating Greece the Trojans pour,
  Wave their thick falchions, and their javelins shower:
  But Ajax turning, to their fears they yield,
  All pale they tremble and forsake the field.

  While thus aloft the hero's corse they bear,
  Behind them rages all the storm of war:
  Confusion, tumult, horror, o'er the throng
  Of men, steeds, chariots, urged the rout along:
  Less fierce the winds with rising flames conspire
  To whelm some city under waves of fire;
  Now sink in gloomy clouds the proud abodes,
  Now crack the blazing temples of the gods;
  The rumbling torrent through the ruin rolls,
  And sheets of smoke mount heavy to the poles.
  The heroes sweat beneath their honour'd load:
  As when two mules, along the rugged road,
  From the steep mountain with exerted strength
  Drag some vast beam, or mast's unwieldy length;
  Inly they groan, big drops of sweat distil,
  The enormous timber lumbering down the hill:
  So these--Behind, the bulk of Ajax stands,
  And breaks the torrent of the rushing bands.
  Thus when a river swell'd with sudden rains
  Spreads his broad waters o'er the level plains,
  Some interposing hill the stream divides.
  And breaks its force, and turns the winding tides.
  Still close they follow, close the rear engage;
  Aeneas storms, and Hector foams with rage:
  While Greece a heavy, thick retreat maintains,
  Wedged in one body, like a flight of cranes,
  That shriek incessant, while the falcon, hung
  High on poised pinions, threats their callow young.
  So from the Trojan chiefs the Grecians fly,
  Such the wild terror, and the mingled cry:
  Within, without the trench, and all the way,
  Strow'd in bright heaps, their arms and armour lay;
  Such horror Jove impress'd! yet still proceeds
  The work of death, and still the battle bleeds.

               [Illustration: VULCAN FROM AN ANTIQUE GEM.]

                    o!
  Hear how his sorrows echo through the shore!
  I cannot ease them, but I must deplore;
  I go at least to bear a tender part,
  And mourn my loved-one with a mother's heart."

  She said, and left the caverns of the main,
  All bathed in tears; the melancholy train
  Attend her way. Wide-opening part the tides,
  While the long pomp the silver wave divides.
  Approaching now, they touch'd the Trojan land;
  Then, two by two, ascended up the strand.
  The immortal mother, standing close beside
  Her mournful offspring, to his sighs replied;
  Along the coast their mingled clamours ran,
  And thus the silver-footed dame began:

  "Why mourns my son? thy late preferr'd request
  The god has granted, and the Greeks distress'd:
  Why mourns my son? thy anguish let me share,
  Reveal the cause, and trust a parent's care."

  He, deeply groaning--"To this cureless grief,
  Not even the Thunderer's favour brings relief.
  Patroclus--Ah!--say, goddess, can I boast
  A pleasure now? revenge itself is lost;
  Patroclus, loved of all my martial train,
  Beyond mankind, beyond myself is slain!
  Lost are those arms the gods themselves bestow'd
  On Peleus; Hector bears the glorious load.
  Cursed be that day, when all the powers above
  Thy charms submitted to a mortal love:
  O hadst thou still, a sister of the main,
  Pursued the pleasures of the watery reign:
  And happier Peleus, less ambitious, led
  A mortal beauty to his equal bed!
  Ere the sad fruit of thy unhappy womb
  Had caused such sorrows past, and woes to come.
  For soon, alas! that wretched offspring slain,
  New woes, new sorrows, shall create again.
  'Tis not in fate the alternate now to give;
  Patroclus dead, Achilles hates to live.
  Let me revenge it on proud Hector's heart,
  Let his last spirit smoke upon my dart;
  On these conditions will I breathe: till then,
  I blush to walk among the race of men."

  A flood of tears, at this, the goddess shed:
  "Ah then, I see thee dying, see tjan foe detains.
  Insulting Hector bears the spoils on high,
  But vainly glories, for his fate is nigh.
  Yet, yet awhile thy generous ardour stay;
  Assured, I jan foe detains.
  Insulting Hector bears the spoils on high,
  But vainly glories, for his fate is nigh.
  Yet, yet awhile thy generous ardour stay;
  Assured, I zen voice the hero rear'd:
  Hosts dropp'd their arms, and trembled as they heard:
  And back the chariots roll, and coursers bound,
  And steeds and men lie mingled on the ground.
  Aghast they see the living lightnings play,
  And turn their eyeballs from the flashing ray.
  Thrice from the trench his dreadful voice he raised,
  And thrice they fled, confounded and amazed.
  Twelve in the tumult wedged, untimely rush'd
  On their own spears, by their own chariots crush'd:
  While, shielded from the darts, the Greeks obtain
  The long-contended carcase of the slain.

  A lofty bier the breathless warrior bears:
  Around, his sad companions melt in tears.
  But chief Achilles, bending down his head,
  Pours unavailing sorrows o'er the dead,
  Whom late triumphant, with his steeds and car,
  He sent refulgent to the field of war;
  (Unhappy change!) now senseless, pale, he found,
  Stretch'd forth, and gash'd with many a gaping wound.

  Meantime, unwearied with his heavenly way,
  In ocean's waves the unwilling light of day
  Quench'd his red orb, at Juno's high command,
  And from their labours eased the Achaian band.
  The frighted Trojans (panting from the war,
  Their steeds unharness'd from the weary car)
  A sudden council call'd: each chief appear'd
  In haste, and standing; for to sit they fear'd.
  'Twas now no season for prolong'd debate;
  They saw Achilles, and in him their fate.
  Silent they stood: Polydamas at last,
  Skill'd to discern the future by the past,
  The son of Panthus, thus express'd his fears
  (The friend of Hector, and of equal years;
  The self-same night to both a being gave,
  One wise in council, one in action brave):

             [Illustration: JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET.]

                     JUNO COMMANDING THE SUN TO SET.


  "In free debate, my friends, your sentence speak;
  For me, I move, before the morning break,
  To raise our camp: too dangerous here our post,
  Far from Troy walls, and on a naked coast.ll prevails: great Peleus' son
  Rises in arms: such grace thy Greeks have won.
  Say (for I know not), is their race divine,
  And thou the mother of that martial line?"

  "What words are these? (the imperial dame replies,
  While anger flash'd from her majestic eyes)
  Succour like this a mortal arm might lend,
  And such success mere human wit attend:
  And shall not I, the second power above,
  Heaven's queen, and consort of the thundering Jove,
  Say, shall not I one nation's fate command,
  Not wreak my vengeance on one guilty land?"

                         [Illustration: TRIPOD.]

                                 TRIPOD.


  So they. Meanwhile the silver-footed dame
  Reach'd the Vulcanian dome, eternal frame!
  High-eminent amid the works divine,
  Where heaven's far-beaming brazen mansions shine.
  There the lame architect the goddess found,
  Obscure in smoke, his forges flaming round,
  While bathed in sweat from fire to fire he flew;
  And puffing loud, the roaring billows blew.
  That day no common task his labour claim'd:
  Full twenty tripods for his hall he framed,
  That placed on living wheels of massy gold,
  (Wondrous to tell,) instinct with spirit roll'd
  From place to place, around the bless'd abodes
  Self-moved, obedient to the beck of gods:
  For their fair handles now, o'erwrought with flowers,
  In moulds prepared, the glowing ore he pours.
  Just as responsive to his thought the frame
  Stood prompt to move, the azure goddess came:
  Charis, his spouse, a grace divinely fair,
  (With purple fillets round her braided hair,)
  Observed her entering; her soft hand she press'd,
  And, smiling, thus the watery queen address'd:

  "What, goddess! this unusual favour draws?
  All hail, and welcome! whatsoe'er the cause;
  Till now a stranger, in a happy hour
  Approach, and taste the dainties of the bower."

     [Illustration: THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFANT VULCAN.]

             THETIS AND EURYNOME RECEIVING THE INFAVULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS.]

                   VULCAN AND CHARIS RECEIVING THETIS.


  To whom the mournful mother thus replies:
  (The crystal drops stood trembling in her eyes:)
  "O Vulcan! say, was ever breast divine
  So pierced with sorrows, so o'erwhelm'd as mine?
  Of all the goddesses, did Jove prepare
  For Thetis only such a weight of care?
  I, only I, of all the watery race
  By force subjected to a man's embrace,
  Who, sinking now with age and sorrow, pays
  The mighty fine imposed on length of days.
  Sprung from my bed, a godlike hero came,
  The bravest sure that ever bore the name;
  Like some fair plant beneath my careful hand
  He grew, he flourish'd, and he graced the land:
  To Troy I sent him! but his native shore
  Never, ah never, shall receive him more;
  (Even while he lives, he wastes with secret woe;)
  Nor I, a goddess, can retard the blow!
  Robb'd of the prize the Grecian suffrage gave,
  The king of nations forced his royal slave:
  For this he grieved; and, till the Greeks oppress'd
  Required his arm, he sorrow'd unredress'd.
  Large gifts they promise, and their elders send;
  In vain--he arms not, but permits his friend
  His arms, his steeds, his forces to employ:
  He marches, combats, almost conquers Troy:
  Then slain by Phoebus (Hector had the name)
  At once resigns his armour, life, and fame.
  But thou, in pity, by my prayer be won:
  Grace with immortal arms this short-lived son,
  And to the field in martial pomp restore,
  To shine with glory, till he shines no more!"

  To her the artist-god: "Thy griefs resign,
  Secure, what Vulcan can, is ever thine.
  O could I hide him from the Fates, as well,
  Or with these hands the cruel stroke repel,
  As I shall forge most envied arms, the gaze
  Of wondering ages, and the world's amaze!"

  Thus having said, the father of the fires
  To the black labours of his forge retires.
  Soon as he bade them blow, the bellows turn'd
  Their iron mouths; and whd heralds still the noisy bands,
  And form a ring, with sceptres in their hands:
  On seats of stone, within the sacred place,(254)
  The reverend elders nodded o'er the case;
  Alternate, each the attesting sceptre took,
  And rising solemn, each his sentence spoke
  Two golden talents lay amidst, in sight,
  The prize of him who best adjudged the right.

  Another part (a prospect differing far)(255)
  Glow'd with refulgent arms, and horrid war.
  Two mighty hosts a leaguer'd town embrace,
  And one would pillage, one would burn the place.
  Meantime the townsmen, arm'd with silent care,
  A secret ambush on the foe prepare:
  Their wives, their children, and the watchful band
  Of trembling parents, on the turrets stand.
  They march; by Pallas and by Mars made bold:
  Gold were the gods, their radiant garments gold,
  And gold their armour: these the squadron led,
  August, divine, superior by the head!
  A place for ambush fit they found, and stood,
  Cover'd with shields, beside a silver flood.
  Two spies at distance lurk, and watchful seem
  If sheep or oxen seek the winding stream.
  Soon the white flocks proceeded o'er the plains,
  And steers slow-moving, and two shepherd swains;
  Behind them piping on their reeds they go,
  Nor fear an ambush, nor suspect a foe.
  In arms the glittering squadron rising round
ngling clusters show,
  And curl'd on silver props, in order glow:
  A darker metal mix'd intrench'd the place;
  And pales of glittering tin the inclosure grace.
  To this, one pathway gently winding leads,
  Where march a train with baskets on their heads,
  (Fair maids and blooming youths,) that smiling bear
  The purple product of the autumnal year.
  To these a youth awakes the warbling strings,
  Whose tender lay the fate of Linus sings;
  In measured dance behind him move the train,
  Tune soft the voice, and answer to the strain.

  Here herds of oxen march, erect and bold,
  Rear high their horns, and seem to low in gold,
  And speed to meadows on whose sounding shores
  A rapid torrent through the rushes roars:
  Four golden herdsmen as their guardians stand,
  And nine sour dogs complete the rustic band.
  Two lions rushing from the wood appear'd;
  And seized a bull, the master of the herd:
  He roar'd: in vain the dogs, the men withstood;
  They tore his flesh, and drank his sable blood.
  The dogs (oft cheer'd in vain) desert the prey,
  Dread the grim terrors, and at distance bay.

  Next this, the eye the art of Vulcan leads
  Deep through fair forests, and a length of meads,
  And stalls, and folds, and scatter'd cots between;
  And fleecy flocks, that whiten all the scene.

  A figured dance succeeds; such once was seen
  In lofty Gnossus for the Cretan queen,
  Form'd by Daedalean art; a comely band
  Of youths and maidens, bounding hand in hand.
  The maids in soft simars of linen dress'd;
  The youths all graceful in the glossy vest:
  Of those the locks with flowery wreath inroll'd;
  Of these the sides adorn'd with swords of gold,
  That glittering gay, from silver belts depend.
  Now all at once they rise, at once descend,
  With well-taught feet: now shape in oblique ways,
  Confusedly regular, the moving maze:
  Now forth at once, too swift for sight, they spring,
  And undistinguish'd blend the flying ring:
  So whirls a wheel, inwaves, that blush'd with early red,
  (With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
  And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light,)
  The immortal arms the goddess-mother bears
  Swift to her son: her son she finds in tears
  Stretch'd o'er Patroclus' corse; while all the rest
  Their sovereign's sorrows in their own express'd.
  A ray divine her heavenly presence shed,
  And thus, his hand soft touching, Thetis said:

  "Suppress, my son, this rage of grief, and know
  It was not man, but heaven, that gave the blow;
  Behold what arms by Vulcan are bestow'd,
  Arms worthy thee, or fit to grace a god."

  Then drops the radiant burden on the ground;
  Clang the strong arms, and ring the shores around;
  Back shrink the Myrmidons with dread surprise,
  And from the broad effulgence turn their eyes.
  Unmoved the hero kindles at the show,
  And feels with rage divine his bosom glow;
  From his fierce eyeballs living flames expire,
  And flash incessant like a stream of fire:
  He turns the radiant gift: and feeds his mind
  On all the immortal artist had design'd.

  "Goddess! (he cried,) these glorious arms, that shine
  With matchless art, confess the hand divine.
  Now to the bloody battle let me bend:
  But ah! the relics of my slaughter'd friend!
  In those wide wounds through which his spirit fled,
  Shall flies, and worms obscene, pollute the dead?"

  "That unavailing care be laid aside,
  (The azure goddess to her son replied,)
  Whole years untouch'd, uninjured shall remain,
  Fresh as in life, the carcase of the slain.
  But go, Achilles, as affairs require,
  Before the Grecian peers renounce thine ire:
  Then uncontroll'd in boundless war engage,
  And heaven with strength supply the mighty rage!"

         [Illustration: THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES.]

                 THETIS BRINGING THE ARMOUR TO ACHILLES.


  Then in the nostrils of the slain she pour'd
  Nectareous drops, and rich ambrosia shower'd
  O'er all the corse. The f  He snatch'd the fury-goddess of debate,
  The dread, the irrevocable oath he swore,
  The immortal seats should ne'er behold her more;
  And whirl'd her headlong down, for ever driven
  From bright Olympus and the starry heaven:
  Thence on the nether world the fury fell;
  Ordain'd with man's contentious race to dwell.
  Full oft the god his son's hard toils bemoan'd,
  Cursed the dire fury, and in secret groan'd.(258)
  Even thus, like Jove himself, was I misled,
  While raging Hector heap'd our camps with dead.
  What can the errors of my rage atone?
  My martial troops, my treasures are thy own:
  This instant from the navy shall be sent
  Whate'er Ulysses promised at thy tent:
  But thou! appeased, propitious to our prayer,
  Resume thy arms, and shine again in war."

  " O king of nations! whose superior sway
  (Returns Achilles) all our hosts obey!
  To keep or send the presents, be thy care;
  To us, 'tis equal: all we ask is war.
  While yet we talk, or but an instant shun
  The fight, our glorious work remains undone.
  Let every Greek, who sees my spear confound
  The Trojan ranks, and deal destruction round,
  With emulation, what I act survey,
  And learn from thence the business of the day.

  The son of Peleus thus; and thus replies
  The great in councils, Ithacus the wise:
  "Though, godlike, thou art by no toils oppress'd,
  At least our armies claim repast and rest:
  Long and laborious must the combat be,
  When by the gods inspired, and led by thee.
  Strength is derived from spirits and from blood,
  And those augment by generous wine and food:
  What boastful son of war, without that stay,
  Can last a hero through a single day?
  Courage may prompt; but, ebbing out his strength,
  Mere unsupported man must yield at length;
  Shrunk with dry famine, and with toils declined,
  The drooping body will desert the mind:
  But built anew with strength-conferring fare,
  With limbs and soul untamed, he tires a war.
  Dismiss the people, thor that, the dire effects shall find,
  If trembling in the ships he lags behind.
  Embodied, to the battle let us bend,
  And all at once on haughty Troy descend."

  And now the delegates Ulysses sent,
  To bear the presents from the royal tent:
  The sons of Nestor, Phyleus' valiant heir,
  Thias and Merion, thunderbolts of war,
  With Lycomedes of Creiontian strain,
  And Melanippus, form'd the chosen train.
  Swift as the word was given, the youths obey'd:
  Twice ten bright vases in the midst they laid;
  A row of six fair tripods then succeeds;
  And twice the number of high-bounding steeds:
  Seven captives next a lovely line compose;
  The eighth Briseis, like the blooming rose,
  Closed the bright band: great Ithacus, before,ith cruel wounds, Patroclus lay.
  Prone on the body fell the heavenly fair,
  Beat her sad breast, and tore her golden hair;
  All beautiful in grief, her humid eyes
  Shining with tears she lifts, and thus she cries:

  "Ah, youth for ever dear, for ever kind,
  Once tender friend of my distracted mind!
  I left thee fresh in life, in beauty gay;
  Now find thee cold, inanimated clay!
  What woes my wretched race of life attend!
  Sorrows on sorrows, never doom'd to end!
  The first loved consort of my virgin bed
  Before these eyes in fatal battle bled:
  My three brave brothers in one mournful day
  All trod the dark, irremeable way:
  Thy friendly hand uprear'd me from the plain,
  And dried my sorrows for a husband slain;
  Achilles' care you promised I should prove,
  The first, the dearest partner of his love;
  That rites divine should ratify the band,
  And make me empress in his native land.
  Accept these grateful tears! for thee they flow,
  For thee, that ever felt another's woe!"

  Her sister captives echoed groan for groan,
  Nor mourn'd Patroclus' fortunes, but their own.
  The leaders press'd the chief on every side;
  Unmoved he heard them, and with sighs denied.

  "If yet Achilles have a friend, whose care
  Is bent to please him, this request forbear;
  Till yonder sun descend, ah, let me pay
  To grief and anguish one abstemious day."

  He spoke, and from the warriors turn'd his face:
  Yet still the brother-kings of Atreus' race,
  Nestor, Idomeneus, Ulysses sage,
  And Phoenix, strive to calm his grief and rage:
  His rage they calm not, nor his grief control;
  He groans, he raves, he sorrows from his soul.

  "Thou too, Patroclus! (thus his heart he vents)
  Once spread the inviting banquet in our tents:
  Thy sweet society, thy winning care,
  Once stay'd Achilles, rushing to the war.
  But now, alas! to death's cold arms resign'd,
  What banquet but revenge can glad my mind?
  What greater sorrow could afflict my breast,
  floating in the wind:
  Like the red star, that from his flaming hair
  Shakes down diseases, pestilence, and war;
  So stream'd the golden honours from his head,
  Trembled the sparkling plumes, and the loose glories shed.
  The chief beholds himself with wondering eyes;
  His arms he poises, and his motions tries;
  Buoy'd by some inward force, he seems to swim,
  And feels a pinion lifting every limb.

  And now he shakes his great paternal spear,
  Ponderous and huge, which not a Greek could rear,
  From Pelion's cloudy top an ash entire
  Old Chiron fell'd, and shaped it for his sire;
  A spear which stern Achilles only wields,
  The death of heroes, and the dread of fields.

  Automedon and Alcimus prepare
  The immortal coursers, and the radiant car;
  (The silver traces sweeping at their side;)
  Their fiery mouths resplendent bridles tied;
  The ivory-studded reins, return'd behind,
  Waved o'er their backs, and to the chariot join'd.
  The charioteer then whirl'd the lash around,
  And swift ascended at one active bound.
  All bright in heavenly arms, above his squire
  Achilles mounts, and sets the field on fire;
  Not brighter Phoebus in the ethereal way
  Flames from his chariot, and restores the day.
  High o'er the host, all terrible he stands,
  And thunders to his steeds these dread commands:

  "Xanthus and Balius! of Podarges' strain,
  (Unless ye boast that heavenly race in vain,)
  Be swift, be mindful of the load ye bear,
  And learn to make your master more your care:
  Through falling squadrons bear my slaughtering sword,
  Nor, as ye left Patroclus, leave your lord."

  The generous Xanthus, as the words he said,
  Seem'd sensible of woe, and droop'd his head:
  Trembling he stood before the golden wain,
  And bow'd to dust the honours of his mane.
  When, strange to tell! (so Juno will'd) he broke
  Eternal silence, and portentous spoke.
  "Achilles! yes! this day at least we bear
  Thy rage in safety through the files of war:
 he main,
  Assumed his throne amid the bright abodes,
  And question'd thus the sire of men and gods:

  "What moves the god who heaven and earth commands,
  And grasps the thunder in his awful hands,
  Thus to convene the whole ethereal state?
  Is Greece and Troy the subject in debate?
  Already met, the louring hosts appear,
  And death stands ardent on the edge of war."

  "'Tis true (the cloud-compelling power replies)
  This day we call the council of the skies
  In care of human race; even Jove's own eye
  Sees with regret unhappy mortals die.
  Far on Olympus' top in secret state
  Ourself will sit, and see the hand of fate
  Work out our will. Celestial powers! descend,
  And ase disdain; the best may be defied
  With mean reproaches, and unmanly pride;
  Unworthy the high race from which we came
  Proclaim'd so loudly by the voice of fame:
  Each from illustrious fathers draws his line;
  Each goddess-born; half human, half divine.
  Thetis' this day, or Venus' offspring dies,
  And tears shall trickle from celestial eyes:
  For when two heroes, thus derived, contend,
  'Tis not in words the glorious strife can end.
  If yet thou further seek to learn my birth
  (A tale resounded through the spacious earth)
  Hear how the glorious origin we prove
  From ancient Dardanus, the first from Jove:
  Dardania's walls he raised; for Ilion, then,
  (The city since of many-languaged men,)
  Was not. The natives were content to till
  The shady foot of Ida's fountful hill.(264)
  From Dardanus great Erichthonius springs,
  The richest, once, of Asia's wealthy kings;
  Three thousand mares his spacious pastures bred,
  Three thousand foals beside their mothers fed.
  Boreas, enamour'd of the sprightly train,
  Conceal'd his godhead in a flowing mane,
  With voice dissembled to his loves he neigh'd,
  And coursed the dappled beauties o'er the mead:
  Hence sprung twelve others of unrivall'd kind,
  Swift as their mother mares, and father wind.
  These lightly skimming, when they swept the plain,
  Nor plied the grass, nor bent the tender grain;
  And when along the level seas they flew,(265)
  Scarce on the surface curl'd the briny dew.
  Such Erichthonius was: from him there came
  The sacred Tros, of whom the Trojan name.
  Three sons renown'd adorn'd his nuptial bed,
  Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymed:
  The matchless Ganymed, divinely fair,
  Whom heaven, enamour'd, snatch'd to upper air,
  To bear the cup of Jove (ethereal guest,
  The grace and glory of the ambrosial feast).
  The two remaining sons the line divide:
  First rose Laomedon from Ilus' side;
  From him Tithonus, now in cares grown old,
  And Priam, bless'd with Hector, brave and ."

  With that, he left him wondering as he lay,
  Then from Achilles chased the mist away:
  Sudden, returning with a stream of light,
  The scene of war came rushing on his sight.
  Then thus, amazed; "What wonders strike my mind!
  My spear, that parted on the wings of wind,
  Laid here before me! and the Dardan lord,
  That fell this instant, vanish'd from my sword!
  I thought alone with mortals to contend,
  But powers celestial sure this foe defend.
  Great as he is, our arms he scarce will try,
  Content for once, with all his gods, to fly.
  Now then let others bleed." This said, aloud
  He vents his fury and inflames the crowd:
  "O Greeks! (he cries, and every rank alarms)
  Join battle, man to man, and arms to arms!
  'Tis not in me, though favour'd by the sky,
  To mow whole troops, and make whole armies fly:
  No god can singly such a host engage,
  Not Mars himself, nor great Minerva's rage.
  But whatsoe'er Achilles can inspire,
  Whate'er of active force, or acting fire;
  Whate'er this heart can prompt, or hand obey;
  All, all Achilles, Greeks! is yours to-day.
  Through yon wide host this arm shall scatter fear,
  And thin the squadrons with my single spear."

  He said: nor less elate with martial joy,
  The godlike Hector warm'd the troops of Troy:
  "Trojans, to war! Think, Hector leads you on;
  Nor dread the vaunts of Peleus' haughty son.
  Deeds must decide our fate. E'en these with words
  Insult the brave, who tremble at their swords:
  The weakest atheist-wretch all heaven defies,
  But shrinks and shudders when the thunder flies.
  Nor from yon boaster shall your chief retire,
  Not though his heart were steel, his hands were fire;
  That fire, that steel, your Hector should withstand,
  And brave that vengeful heart, that dreadful hand."

  Thus (breathing rage through all) the hero said;
  A wood of lances rises round his head,
  Clamours on clamours tempest all the air,
  They join, they throng, they thicken to the war.
  ant o'er his dying lord.
  As when a flame the winding valley fills,
  And runs on crackling shrubs between the hills;
  Then o'er the stubble up the mountain flies,
  Fires the high woods, and blazes to the skies,
  This way and that, the spreading torrent roars:
  So sweeps the hero through the wasted shores;
  Around him wide, immense destruction pours
  And earth is deluged with the sanguine showers
  As with autumnal harvests cover'd o'er,
  And thick bestrewn, lies Ceres' sacred floor;
  When round and round, with never-wearied pain,
  The trampling steers beat out the unnumber'd grain:
  So the fierce coursers, as the chariot rolls,
  Tread down whole ranks, and crush out heroes' souls,
  Dash'd from their hoofs while o'er the dead they fly,
  Black, bloody drops the smoking chariot dye:
  The spiky wheels through heaps of carnage tore;
  And thick the groaning axles dropp'd with gore.
  High o'er the scene of death Achilles stood,
  All grim with dust, all horrible in blood:
  Yet still insatiate, still with rage on flame;
  Such is the lust of never-dying fame!

                         [Illustration: CENTAUR.]

                                 CENTAUR.





BOOK XXI.


ARGUMENT.

THE BATTLE IN THE RIVER SCAMANDER.(269)

The Trojans fly before Achilles, some towards the town, others to the
river Scamander: he falls upon the latter with great slaughter: takes
twelve captives alive, to sacrifice to the shade of Patroclus; and kills
Lycaon and Asteropeus. Scamander attacks him with all his waves: Neptune
and Pallas assist the hero: Simois joins Scamander: at length Vulcan, by
the instigation of Juno, almost dries up the river. This Combat ended, the
other gods engage each other. Meanwhile Achilles continues the slaughter,
drives the rest into Troy: Agenor only makes a stand, and is conveyed away
in a cloud by Apollo; who (to delude Achilles) takes upon him Agenor's
shape, and while he pursues him in that disguise, gives the Trojans an
opportunity  waves.
  Now, tired with slaughter, from the Trojan band
  Twelve chosen youths he drags alive to land;
  With their rich belts their captive arms restrains
  (Late their proud ornaments, but now their chains).
  These his attendants to the ships convey'd,
  Sad victims destined to Patroclus' shade;

  Then, as once more he plunged amid the flood,
  The young Lycaon in his passage stood;
  The son of Priam; whom the heame conquering hand
  Now never to return! and doom'd to go
  A sadder journey to the shades below.
  His well-known face when great Achilles eyed,
  (The helm and visor he had cast aside
  With wild affright, and dropp'd upon the field
  His useless lance and unavailing shield,)
  As trembling, panting, from the stream he fled,
  And knock'd his faltering knees, the hero said.
  "Ye mighty gods! what wonders strike my view!
  Is it in vain our conquering arms subdue?
  Sure I shall see yon heaps of Trojans kill'd
  Rise from the shades, and brave me on the field;
  As now the captive, whom so late I bound
  And sold to Lemnos, stalks on Trojan ground!
  Not him the sea's unmeasured deeps detain,
  That bar such numbers from their native plain;
  Lo! he returns. Try, then, my flying spear!
  Try, if the grave can hold the wanderer;
  If earth, at length this active prince can seize,
  Earth, whose strong grasp has held down Hercules."

  Thus while he spoke, the Trojan pale with fears
  Approach'd, and sought his knees with suppliant tears
  Loth as he was to yield his youthful breath,
  And his soul shivering at the approach of death.
  Achilles raised the spear, prepared to wound;
  He kiss'd his feet, extended on the ground:
  And while, above, the spear suspended stood,
  Longing to dip its thirsty point in blood,
  One hand embraced them close, one stopp'd the dart,
  While thus these melting words attempt his heart:

  "Thy well-known captive, great Achilleshat avails to trace
  (Replied the warrior) our illustrious race?
  From rich Paeonia's valleys I command,
  Arm'd with protended spears, my native band;
  Now shines the tenth bright morning since I came
  In aid of Ilion to the fields of fame:
  Axius, who swells with all the neighbouring rills,
  And wide around the floated region fills,
  Begot my sire, whose spear much glory won:
  Now lift thy arm, and try that hero's son!"

  Threatening he said: the hostile chiefs advance;
  At once Asteropeus discharged each lance,
  (For both his dexterous hands the lance could wield,)
  One struck, but pierced not, the Vulcanian shield;
  One razed Achilles' hand; the spouting blood
  Spun forth; in earth the fasten'd weapon stood.
  Like lightning next the Pelean javelin flies:
  Its erring fury hiss'd along the skies;
  Deep in the swelling bank was driven the spear,
  Even to the middle earth; and quiver'd there.
  Then from his side the sword Pelides drew,
  And on his foe with double fury flew.
  The foe thrice tugg'd, and shook the rooted wood;
  Repulsive of his might the weapon stood:
  The fourth, he tries to break the spear in vain;
  Bent as he stands, he tumbles to the plain;
  His belly open'd with a ghastly wound,
  The reeking entrails pour upon the ground.
  Beneath the hero's feet he panting lies,
  And his eye darkens, and his spirit flies;
  While the proud victor thus triumphing said,
  His radiant armour tearing from the dead:

  "So ends thy glory! Such the fate they prove,
  Who strive presumptuous with the sons of Jove!
  Sprung from a river, didst thou boast thy line?
  But great Saturnius is the source of mine.
  How durst thou vaunt thy watery progeny?
  Of Peleus, Ćacus, and Jove, am I.
  The race of these superior far to those,
  As he that thunders to the stream that flows.
  What rivers can, Scamander might have shown;
  But Jove he dreads, nor wars against his son.
  Even Achelous might contend in vain,
  And all the roaring billo
  A spreading elm, that overhung the flood;
  He seized a bending bough, his steps to stay;
  The plant uprooted to his weight gave way.(270)
  Heaving the bank, and undermining all;
  Loud flash the waters to the rushing fall
  Of the thick foliage. The large trunk display'd
  Bridged the rough flood across: the hero stay'd
  On this his weight, and raised upon his hand,
  Leap'd from the ch maid.
  Stay, and the furious flood shall cease to rave
  'Tis not thy fate to glut his angry wave.
  But thou, the counsel heaven suggests, attend!
  Nor breathe from combat, nor thy sword suspend,
  Till Troy receive her flying sons, till all
  Her routed squadrons pant behind their wall:
  Hector alone shall stand his fatal chance,
  And Hector's blood shall smoke upon thy lance.
  Thine is the glory doom'd." Thus spake the gods:
  Then swift ascended to the bright abodes.

  Stung with new ardour, thus by heaven impell'd,
  He springs impetuous, and invades the field:
  O'er all the expanded plain the waters spread;
  Heaved on the bounding billows danced the dead,
  Floating 'midst scatter'd arms; while casques of gold
  And turn'd-up bucklers glitter'd as they roll'd.
  High o'er the surging tide, by leaps and bounds,
  He wades, and mounts; the parted wave resounds.
  Not a whole river stops the hero's course,
  While Pallas fills him with immortal force.
  With equal rage, indignant Xanthus roars,
  And lifts his billows, and o'erwhelms his shores.

  Then thus to Simois! "Haste, my brother flood;
  And check this mortal that controls a god;
  Our bravest heroes else shall quit the fight,
  And Ilion tumble from her towery height.
  Call then thy subject streams, and bid them roar,
  From all thy fountains swell thy watery store,
  With broken rocks, and with a load of dead,
  Charge the black surge, and pour it on his head.
  Mark how resistless through the floods he goes,
  And boldly bids the warring gods be foes!
  But nor that force, nor form divine to sight,
  Shall aught avail him, if our rage unite:
  Whelm'd under our dark gulfs those arms shall lie,
  That blaze so dreadful in each Trojan eye;
  And deep beneath a sandy mountain hurl'd,
  Immersed remain this terror of the world.
  Such ponderous ruin shall confound the place,
  No Greeks shall e'er his perish'd relics grace,
  No hand his bones shall gather, or inhume;
  These his cold riwarring gods in fierce contention join:
  Rekindling rage each heavenly breast alarms:
  With horrid clangour shock the ethereal arms:
  Heaven in loud thunder bids the trumpet sound;
  And wide beneath them groans the rending ground.
  Jove, as his sport, the dreadful scene descries,
  And views contending gods with careless eyes.
  The power of battles lifts his brazen spear,
  And first assaults the radiant queen of war:

  "What moved thy madness, thus to disunite
  Ethereal minds, and mix all heaven in fight?
  What wonder this, when in thy frantic mood
  Thou drovest a mortal to insult a god?
  Thy impious hand Tydides' javelin bore,
  And madly bathed it in celestial gore."

  He spoke, and smote the long-resounding shield,
  Which bears Jove's thunder on its dreadful field:
  The adamantine aegis of her sire,
  That turns the glancing bolt and forked fire.

  Then heaved the goddess in her mighty hand
  A stone, the limit of the neighbouring land,
  There fix'd from eldest times; black, craggy, vast;
  This at the heavenly homicide she cast.
  Thundering he falls, a mass of monstrous size:
  And seven broad acres covers as he lies.
  The stunning stroke his stubborn nerves unbound:
  Loud o'er the fields his ringing arms resound:
  The scornful dame her conquest views with smiles,
  And, glorying, thus the prostrate god reviles:

  "Hast thou not yet, insatiate fury! known
  How far Minerva's force transcends thy own?
  Juno, whom thou rebellious darest withstand,
  Corrects thy folly thus by Pallas' hand;
  Thus meets thy broken faith with just disgrace,
  And partial aid to Troy's perfidious race."

  The goddess spoke, and turn'd her eyes away,
  That, beaming round, diffused celestial day.
  Jove's Cyprian daughter, stooping on the land,
  Lent to the wounded god her tender hand:
  Slowly he rises, scarcely breathes with pain,
  And, propp'd on her fair arm, forsakes the plain.
  This the bright empress of the heavens survey'd,
  And, scoffinglike us, infest the faithless race;
  Like us, their present, future sons destroy,
  And from its deep foundations heave their Troy?"

  Apollo thus: "To combat for mankind
  Ill suits the wisdom of celestial mind;
  For what is man? Calamitous by birth,
  They owe their life and nourishment to earth;
  Like yearly leaves, that now, with beauty crown'd,
  Smile on the sun; now, wither on the ground.
  To their own hands commit the frantic scene,
  Nor mix immortals in a cause so mean."

  Then turns his face, far-beaming heavenly fires,
  And from the senior power submiss retires:
  Him thus retreating, Artemis upbraids,
  The quiver'd huntress of the sylvan shades:

  "And is it thus the youthful Phoebus flies,
  And yields to ocean's hoary sire the prize?
  How vain that martial pomp, and dreadful show
  Of pointed arrows and the silver bow!
  Now boast no more in yon celestial bower,
  Thy force can match the great earth-shaking power."

  Silent he heard the queen of woods upbraid:
  Not so Saturnia bore the vaunting maid:
  But furious thus: "What insolence has driven
  Thy pride to face the majesty of heaven?
  What though by Jove the female plague design'd,
  Fierce to the feeble race of womankind,
  The wretched matron feels thy piercing dart;
  Thy sex's tyrant, with a tiger's heart?
  What though tremendous in the woodland chase
  Thy certain arrows pierce the savage race?
  How dares thy rashness on the powers divine
  Employ those arms, or match thy force with mine?
  Learn hence, no more unequal war to wage--"
  She said, and seized her wrists with eager rage;
  These in her left hand lock'd, her right untied
  The bow, the quiver, and its plumy pride.
  About her temples flies the busy bow;
  Now here, now there, she winds her from the blow;
  The scattering arrows, rattling from the case,
  Drop round, and idly mark the dusty place.
  Swift from the field the baffled huntress flies,
  And scarce restrains the torrent in her eyes:
  So, whennd many are the sons of Troy.
  Great as thou art, even thou may'st stain with gore
  These Phrygian fields, and press a foreign shore."

  He said: with matchless force the javelin flung
  Smote on his knee; the hollow cuishes rung
  Beneath the pointed steel; but safe from harms
  He stands impassive in the ethereal arms.
  Then fiercely rushing on the daring foe,
  His lifted arm prepares the fatal blow:
  But, jealous of his fame, Apollo shrouds
  The god-like Trojan in a veil of clouds.
  Safe from pursuit, and shut from mortal view,
  Dismiss'd with fame, the favoured youth withdrew.
  Meanwhile the god, to cover their escape,
  Assumes Agenor's habit, voice and shape,
  Flies from the furious chief in this disguise;
  The furious chief still follows where he flies.
  Now o'er the fields they stretch with lengthen'd strides,
  Now urge the course where swift Scamander glides:
  The god, now distant scarce a stride before,
  Tempts his pursuit, and wheels about the shore;
  While all the flying troops their speed employ,
  And pour on heaps into the walls of Troy:
  No stop, no stay; no thought to ask, or tell,
  WXAOief incensed--"Too partial god of day!
  To check my conquests in the middle way:
  How few in Ilion else had refuge found!
  What gasping numbers now had bit the ground!
  Thou robb'st me of a glory justly mine,
  Powerful of godhead, and of fraud divine:
  Mean fame, alas! for one of heavenly strain,
  To cheat a mortal who repines in vain."

  Then to the city, terrible and strong,
  With high and haughty steps he tower'd along,
  So the proud courser, victor of the prize,
  To the near goal with double ardour flies.
  Him, as he blazing shot across the field,
  The careful eyes of Priam first beheld.
  Not half so dreadful rises to the sight,(274)
  Through the thick gloom of some tempestuous night,
  Orion's dog (the year when autumn weighs),
  And o'er the feebler stars exerts his rays;
  Terrific glory! for his burning breath
  Taints the red air with fevers, plagues, and death.
  So flamed his fiery mail. Then wept the sage:
  He strikes his reverend head, now white with age;
  He lifts his wither'd arms; obtests the skies;
  He calls his much-loved son with feeble cries:
  The son, resolved Achilles' force to dare,
  Full at the Scaean gates expects the war;
  While the sad father on the rampart stands,
  And t thought recall:
  Shall proud Polydamas before the gate
  Proclaim, his counsels are obey'd too late,
  Which timely follow'd but the former night,
  What numbers had been saved by Hector's flight?
  That wise advice rejected with disdain,
  I feel my folly in my people slain.
  Methinks my suffering country's voice I hear,
  But most her worthless sons insult my ear,
  On my rash courage charge the chance of war,
  And blame those virtues which they cannot share.
  No--if I e'er return, return I must
  Glorious, my country's terror laid in dust:
  Or if I perish, let her see me fall
  In field at least, and fighting for her wall.
  And yet suppose these measures I forego,
  Approach unarm'd, and parley with the foe,
  The warrior-shield, the helm, and lance, lay down.
  And treat on terms of peace to save the town:
  The wife withheld, the treasure ill-detain'd
  (Cause of the war, and grievance of the land)
  With honourable justice to restore:
  And add half Ilion's yet remaining store,
  Which Troy shall, sworn, produce; that injured Greece
  May share our wealth, and leave our walls in peace.
  But why this thought? Unarm'd if I should go,
  What hope of mercy from this vengeful foe,
  But woman-like to fall, and fall without a blow?
  We greet not here, as man conversing man,
  Met at an oak, or journeying o'er a plain;
  No season now for calm familiar talk,
  Like youths and maidens in an evening walk:
  War is our business, but to whom is given
  To die, or triumph, that, determine Heaven!"

  Thus pondering, like a god the Greek drew nigh;
  His dreadful plumage nodded from on high;
  The Pelian javelin, in his better hand,
  Shot trembling rays that glitter'd o'er the land;
  And on his breast the beamy splendour shone,
  Like Jove's own lightning, or the rising sun.
  As Hector sees, unusual terrors rise,
  Struck by some god, he fears, recedes, and flies.
  He leaves the gates, he leaves the wall behind:
  Achilles follows like the winged wind.in,
  Whose grateful fumes the gods received with joy,
  From Ida's summits, and the towers of Troy:
  Now see him flying; to his fears resign'd,
  And fate, and fierce Achilles, close behind.
  Consult, ye powers! ('tis worthy your debate)
  Whether to snatch him from impending fate,
  Or let him bear, by stern Pelides slain,
  (Good as he is) the lot imposed on man."

  Then Pallas thus: "Shall he whose vengeance forms
  The forky bolt, and blackens heaven with storms,
  Shall he prolong one Trojan's forfeit breath?
  A man, a mortal, pre-ordain'd to death!
  And will no murmurs fill the courts above?
  No gods indignant blame their partial Jove?"

  "Go then (return'd the sire) without delay,
  Exert thy will: I give the Fates their way.
  Swift at the mandate pleased Tritonia flies,
  And stoops impetuous from the cleaving skies.

  As through the forest, o'er the vale and lawn,
  The well-breath'd beagle drives the flying fawn,
  In vain he tries the covert of the brakes,
  Or deep beneath the trembling thicket shakes;
  Sure of the vapour in the tainted dews,
  The certain hound his various maze pursues.
  Thus step by step, where'er the Trojan wheel'd,
  There swift Achilles compass'd round the field.
  Oft as to reach the Dardan gates he bends,
  And hopes the assistance of his pitying friends,
  (Whose showering arrows, as he coursed below,
  From the high turrets might oppress the foe,)
  So oft Achilles turns him to the plain:
  He eyes the city, but he eyes in vain.
  As men in slumbers seem with speedy pace,
  One to pursue, and one to lead the chase,
  Their sinking limbs the fancied course forsake,
  Nor this can fly, nor that can overtake:
  No less the labouring heroes pant and strain:
  While that but flies, and this pursues in vain.

  What god, O muse, assisted Hector's force
  With fate itself so long to hold the course?
  Phoebus it was; who, in his latovers round, and calls thee to thy death."

  He spoke, and launch'd his javelin at the foe;
  But Hector shunn'd the meditated blow:
  He stoop'd, while o'er his head the flying spear
  Sang innocent, and spent its force in air.
  Minerva watch'd it falling on the land,
  Then drew, and gave to great Achilles' hand,
  Unseen of Hector, who, elate with joy,
  Now shakes his lance, and braves the dread of Troy.

  "The life you boasted to that javelin given,
  Prince! you have miss'd. My fate depends on Heaven,
  To thee, presumptuous as thou art, unknown,
  Or what must prove my fortune, or thy own.
  Boasting is but an art, our fears to blind,
  And with false terrors sink another's mind.
  But know, whatever fate I am to try,
  By no dishonest wound shall Hector die.
  I shall not fall a fugitive at least,
  My soul shall bravely issue from my breast.
  But first, try thou my arm; and may this dart
  End all my country's woes, deep buried in thy heart."

  The weapon flew, its course unerring held,
  Unerring, but the heavenly shield repell'd
  The mortal dart; resulting with a bound
  From off the ringing orb, it struck the ground.
  Hector beheld his javelin fall in vain,
  Nor other lance, nor other hope remain;
  He calls Deiphobus, demands a spear--
  In vain, for no Deiphobus was there.
  All comfortless he stands: then, with a sigh;
  "'Tis so--Heaven wills it, and my hour is nigh!
  I deem'd Deiphobus had heard my call,
  But he secure lies guarded in the wall.
  A god deceived me; Pallas, 'twas thy deed,
  Death and black fate approach! 'tis I must bleed.
  No refuge now, no succour from above,
  Great Jove deserts me, and the son of Jove,
  Propitious once, and kind! Then welcome fate!
  'Tis true I perish, yet I perish great:
  Yet in a mighty deed I shall expire,
  Let future ages hear it, and admire!"

  Fierce, at the word, his weighty sword he drew,
  And, all collected, on Achilles flew.
  So Jove's bold bird, high balanced in the air,
manly body left a load of clay,)
  And plaintive glides along the dreary coast,
  A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost!

  Achilles, musing as he roll'd his eyes
  O'er the dead hero, thus unheard, replies:
  "Die thou the first! When Jove and heaven ordain,
  I follow thee"--He said, and stripp'd the slain.
  Then forcing backward from the gaping wound
  The reeking javelin, cast it on the ground.
  The thronging Greeks behold with wondering eyes
  His manly beauty and superior size;
  While some, ignobler, the great dead deface
  With wounds ungenerous, or with taunts disgrace:

  "How changed that Hector, who like Jove of late
  Sent lightning on our fleets, and scatter'd fate!"

  High o'er the slain the great Achilles stands,
  Begirt with heroes and surrounding bands;
  And thus aloud, while all the host attends:
  "Princes and leaders! countrymen and friends!
  Since now at length the powerful will of heaven
  The dire destroyer to our arm has given,
  Is not Troy fallen already? Haste, ye powts wept the fatal hour,
  And, bending o'er thee, mix'd the tender shower!
  Some comfort that had been, some sad relief,
  To melt in full satiety of grief!"

  Thus wail'd the father, grovelling on the ground,
  And all the eyes of Ilion stream'd around.

  Amidst her matrons Hecuba appears:
  (A mourning princess, and a train in tears;)
  "Ah why has Heaven prolong'd this hated breath,
  Patient of horrors, to behold thy death?
  O Hector! late thy parents' pride and joy,
  The boast of nations! the defence of Troy!
  To whom her safety and her fame she owed;
  Her chief, her hero, and almost her god!
  O fatal change! become in one sad day
  A senseless corse! inanimated clay!"

  But not as yet the fatal news had spread
  To fair Andromache, of Hector dead;
  As yet no messenger had told his fate,
  Not e'en his stay without the Scaean gate.
  Far in the close recesses of the dome,
  Pensive she plied the melancholy loom;
  A growing work employ'd her secret hours,
  Confusedly gay with intermingled flowers.
  Her faLL.


  "O wretched husband of a wretched wife!
  Born with one fate, to one unhappy life!
  For sure one star its baneful beam display'd
  On Priam's roof, and Hippoplacia's shade.
  From different parents, different climes we came.
  At different periods, yet our fate the same!
  Why was my birth to great Aetion owed,
  And why was all that tender care bestow'd?
  Would I had never been!--O thou, the ghost
  Of my dead husband! miserably lost!
  Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!
  And I abandon'd, desolate, alone!
  An only child, once comfort of my pains,
  Sad product now of hapless love, remains!
  No more to smile upon his sire; no friend
  To help him now! no father to defend!
  For should he 'scape the sword, the common doom,
  What wrongs attend him, and what griefs to come!
  Even from his own paternal roof expell'd,
  Some stranger ploughs his patrimonial field.
  The day, that to the shades the father sends,
  Robs the sad orphan of his father's friends:
  He, wretched outcast of mankind! appears
  For ever sad, for ever bathed in tears;
  Amongst the happy, unregarded, he
  Hangs on the robe, or trembles at the knee,
  While those his father's former bounty fed
  Nor reach the goblet, nor divide the bread:
  The kindest but his present wants allay,
  To leave him wretched the succeeding day.
  Frugal compassion! Heedless, they who boast
  Both parents still, nor feel what he has lost,
  Shall cry, 'Begone! thy father feasts not here:'
  The wretch obeys, retiring with a tear.
  Thus wretched, thus retiring all in tears,
  To my sad soul Astyanax appears!
  Forced by repeated insults to return,
  And to his widow'd mother vainly mourn:
  He, who, with tender delicacy bred,
  With princes sported, and on dainties fed,
  And when still evening gave him up to rest,
  Sunk soft in down upon the nurse's breast,
  Must--ah what must he not? Whom Ilion calls
  Astyanax, from her well-guarded walls,(279)
  Is now that name no more, unhappy boy!omiscuous stream, the reeking blood.
  And now a band of Argive monarchs brings
  The glorious victor to the king of kings.
  From his dead friend the pensive warrior went,
  With steps unwilling, to the regal tent.
  The attending heralds, as by office bound,
  With kindled flames the tripod-vase surround:
  To cleanse his conquering hands from hostile gore,
  They urged in vain; the chief refused, and swore:(282)

  "No drop shall touch me, by almighty Jove!
  The first and greatest of the gods above!
  Till on the pyre I place thee; till I rear
  The grassy mound, and clip thy sacred hair.
  Some ease at least those pious rites may give,
  And soothe my sorrows, while I bear to live.
  Howe'er, reluctant as I am, I stay
  And share your feast; but with the dawn of day,
  (O king of men!) it claims thy royal care,
  That Greece the warrior's funeral pile prepare,
  And bid the forests fall: (such rites are paid
  To heroes slumbering in eternal shade:)
  Then, when his earthly part shall mount in fire,
  Let the leagued squadrons to their posts retire."

  He spoke: they hear him, and the word obey;
  The rage of hunger and of thirst allay,
  Then ease in sleep the labours of the day.
  But great Pelides, stretch'd along the shore,
  Where, dash'd on rocks, the broken billows roar,
  Lies inly groaning; while on either hand
  The martial Myrmidons confusedly stand.
  Along the grass his languid m
  Together have we lived; together bred,
  One house received us, and one table fed;
  That golden urn, thy goddess-mother gave,
  May mix our ashes in one common grave."

  "And is it thou? (he answers) To my sight(283)
  Once more return'st thou from the realms of night?
  O more than brother! Think each office paid,
  Whate'er can rest a discontented shade;
  But grant one last embrace, unhappy boy!
  Afford at least that melancholy joy."

  He said, and with his longing arms essay'd
  In vain to grasp the visionary shade!
  Like a thin smoke he sees the spirit fly,(284)
  And hears a feeble, lamentable cry.
  Confused he wakes; amazement breaks the bands
  Of golden sleep, and starting from the sands,
  Pensive he muses with uplifted hands:

  "'Tis true, 'tis certain; man, though dead, retains
  Part of himself; the immortal mind remains:
  The form subsists without the body's aid,
  Aerial semblance, and an empty shade!
  This night my friend, so late in battle lost,
  Stood at my side, a pensive, plaintive ghost:
  Even now familiar, as in life, he came;
  Alas! how different! yet how like the same!"

  Thus while he spoke, each eye grew big with tears:
  And now the rosy-finger'd morn appears,
  Shows every mournful face with tears o'erspread,
  And glares on the pale visage of the dead.
  But Agamemnon, as the rites demand,
  With mules and waggons sends a chosen band
  To load the timber, and the pile to rear;
  A charge consign'd to Merion's faithful care.
  With proper instruments they take the road,
  Axes to cut, and ropes to sling the load.
  First march the heavy mules, securely slow,
  O'er hills, o'er dales, o'er crags, o'er rocks they go:(285)
  Jumping, high o'er the shrubs of the rough ground,
  Rattle the clattering cars, and the shock'd axles bound
  But when arrived at Ida's spreading woods,(286)
  (Fair Ida, water'd with descending floods,)
  Loud sounds the axe, redoubling strokes on strokes;
  On all sides round the forest hurlsAnd let the chiefs alone attend the pyre;
  The pious care be ours, the dead to burn--"
  He said: the people to their ships return:
  While those deputed to inter the slain
  Heap with a rising pyramid the plain.(288)
  A hundred foot in length, a hundred wide,
  The growing structure spreads on every side;
  High on the top the manly corse they lay,
  And well-fed sheep and sable oxen slay:
  Achilles covered with their fat the dead,
  And the piled victims round the body spread;
  Then jars of honey, and of fragrant oil,
  Suspends around, low-bending o'er the pile.
  Four sprightly coursers, with a deadly groan
  Pour forth their lives, and on the pyre are thrown.
  Of nine large dogs, domestic at his board,
  Fall two, selected to attend their lord,
  Then last of all, and horrible to tell,
  Sad sacrifice! twelve Trojan captives fell.(289)
  On these the rage of fire victorious preys,
  Involves and joins them in one common blaze.
  Smear'd with the bloody rites, he stands on high,
  And calls the spirit with a dreadful cry:(290)

  "All hail, Patroclus! let thy vengeful ghost
  Hear, and exult, on Pluto's dreary coast.
  Behold Achilles' promise fully paid,
  Twelve Trojan heroes offer'd to thy shade;
  But heavier fates on Hector's corse attend,
  Saved from the flames, for hungry dogs to rend."

  So spake he, threatening: but the gods made vain
  His threat, and guard inviolate the slain:
  Celestial Venus hover'd o'er his head,
  And roseate unguents, heavenly fragrance! shed:
  She watch'd him all the night and all the day,
  And drove the bloodhounds from their destined prey.
  Nor sacred Phoebus less employ'd his care;
  He pour'd around a veil of gather'd air,
  And kept the nerves undried, the flesh entire,
  Against the solar beam and Sirian fire.

              [Illustration: THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS.]

                      THE FUNERAL PILE OF PATROCLUS.


  Nor yet the pile, where dead Patroclus lies,
  Smokes, nor as yet the sulhis sad companions place,
  With tears collected, in the golden vase.
  The sacred relics to the tent they bore;
  The urn a veil of linen covered o'er.
  That done, they bid the sepulchre aspire,
  And cast the deep foundations round the pyre;
  High in the midst they heap the swelling bed
 nt Greeks! decreed
  To the brave rulers of the racing steed;
  Prizes which none beside ourself could gain,
  Should our immortal coursers take the plain;
  (A race unrivall'd, which from ocean's god
  Peleus received, and on his son bestow'd.)
  But this no time our vigour to display;
  Nor suit, with them, the games of this sad day:
  Lost is Patroclus now, that wont to deck
  Their flowing manes, and sleek their glossy neck.
  Sad, as they shared in human grief, they stand,
  And trail those graceful honours on the sand!
  Let others for the noble task prepare,
  Who trust the courser and the flying car."

  Fired at his word the rival racers rise;
  But far the first Eumelus hopes the prize,
  Famed though Pieria for the fleetest breed,
  And skill'd to manage the high-bounding steed.
  With equal ardour bold Tydides swell'd,
  The steeds of Tros beneath his yoke compell'd
  (Which late obey'd the Dardan chiefs command,
  When scarce a god redeem'd him from his hand).
  Then Menelaus his Podargus brings,
  And the famed courser of the king of kings:
  Whom rich Echepolus (more rich than brave),
  To 'scape the wars, to Agamemnon gave,
  (Ćthe her name) at home to end his days;
  Base wealth preferring to eternal praise.
  Next him Antilochus demands the course
  With beating heart, and cheers his Pylian horse.
  Experienced Nestor gives his son the reins,
  Directs his judgment, and his heat restrains;
  Nor idly warns the hoary sire, nor hears
  The prudent son with unattending ears.

  "My son! though youthful ardour fire thy breast,
  The gods have loved thee, and with arts have bless'd;
  Neptune and Jove on thee conferr'd the skill
  Swift round the goal to turn the flying wheel.
  To guide thy conduct little precept needs;
  But slow, and past their vigour, are my steeds.
  Fear not thy rivals, though for swiftness known;
  Compare those rivals' judgment and thy own:
  It is not strength, but art, obtains the prize,
  And to be swift is less thaucceeds:
  Close on Eumelus' back they puff the wind,
  And seem just mounting on his car behind;
  Full on his neck he feels the sultry breeze,
  And, hovering o'er, their stretching shadows sees.
  Then had he lost, or left a doubtful prize;
  But angry Phoebus to Tydides flies,
  Strikes from his hand the scourge, and renders vain
  His matchless horses' labour on the plain.
  Rage fills his eye with anguish, to survey
  Snatch'd from his hope the glories of the day.
  The fraud celestial Pallas sees with pain,
  Springs to her knight, and gives the scourge again,
  And fills his steeds with vigour. At a stroke
  She breaks his rival's chariot from the yoke:
  No more their way the startled horses held;
  The car reversed came rattling on the field;
  Shot headlong from his seat, beside the wheel,
  Prone on the dust the unhappy master fell;
  His batter'd face and elbows strike the ground;
  Nose, mouth, and front, one undistinguish'd wound:
  Grief stops his voice, a torrent drowns his eyes:
  Before him far the glad Tydides flies;
  Minerva's spirit drives his matchless pace,
  And crowns him victor of the labour'd race.

  The next, though distant, Menelaus succeeds;
  While thus young Nestor animates his steeds:
  "Now, now, my generous pair, exert your force;
  Not that we hope to match Tydides' horse,
  Since great Minerva wings their rapid way,
  And gives their lord the honours of the day;
  But reach Atrides! shall his mare outgo
  Your swiftness? vanquish'd by a female foe?
  Through your neglect, if lagging on the plain
  The last ignoble gift be all we gain,
  No more shall Nestor's hand your food supply,
  The old man's fury rises, and ye die.
  Haste then: yon narrow road, bman! (Oileus rashly thus replies)
  Thy tongue too hastily confers the prize;
  Of those who view the course, nor sharpest eyed,
  Nor youngest, yet the readiest to decide.
  Eumelus' steeds, high bounding in the chase,
  Still, as at first, unrivall'd lead the race:
  I well discern him, as he shakes the rein,
  And hear his shouts victorious o'er the plain."

  Thus he. Idomeneus, incensed, rejoin'd:
  "Barbarous of words! and arrogant of mind!
  Contentious prince, of all the Greeks beside
  The last in merit, as the first in pride!
  To vile reproach what answer can we make?
  A goblet or a tripod let us stake,
  And be the king the judge. The most unwise
  Will learn their rashness, when they pay the price."

  He said: and Ajax, by mad passion borne,
  Stern had replied; fierce scorn enhancing scorn
  To fell extremes. But Thetis' godlike son
  Awful amidst them rose, and thus begun:

  "Forbear, ye chiefs! reproachful to contend;
  Much would ye blame, should others thus offend:
  And lo! the approaching steeds your contest end."
  No sooner had he spoke, but thundering near,
  Drives, through a stream of dust, the charioteer.
  High o'er his head the circling lash he wields:
  His bounding horses scarcely touch the fields:
  His car amidst the dusty whirlwind roll'd,
  Bright with the mingled blaze of tin and gold,
  Refulgent through the cloud: no eye could find
  The track his flying wheels had left behind:
  And the fierce coursers urged their rapid pace
  So swift, it seem'd a flight, and not a race.
  Now victor at the goal Tydides stands,
  Quits his bright car, and springs upon the sands;
  From the hot steeds the sweaty torrents stream;
  The well-plied whip is hung athwart the beam:
  With joy brave Sthenelus receives the prize,
  The tripod-vase, and dame with radiant eyes:
  These to the ships his train triumphant leads,
  The chief himself unyokes the panting steeds.

  Young Nestor follows (who by art, not force,
  O'erpass'd Atrides) 
  The corslet brought, and gave it to his hand.
  Distinguish'd by his friend, his bosom glows
  With generous joy: then Menelaus rose;
  The herald placed the sceptre in his hands,
  And still'd the clamour of the shouting bands.
  Not without cause incensed at Nestor's son,
  And inly grieving, thus the king begun:

  "The praise of wisdom, in thy youth obtain'd,
  An act so rash, Antilochus! has stain'd.
  Robb'd of my glory and my just reward,
  To you, O Grecians! be my wrong declared:
  So not a leader shall our conduct blame,
  Or judge me envious of a rival's fame.
  But shall not we, ourselves, the truth maintain?
  What needs appealing in a fact so plain?
  What Greek shall blame me, if I bid thee rise,
  And vindicate by oath th' ill-gotten prize?
  Rise if thou darest, before thy chariot stand,
  The driving scourge high-lifted in thy hand;
  And touch thy steeds, and swear thy whole intent
  Was but to conquer, not to circumvent.
  Swear by that god whose liquid arms surround
  The globe, and whose dread earthquakes heave the ground!"

  The prudent chief with calm attention heard;
  Then mildly thus: "Excuse, if youth have err'd;
  Superior as thou art, forgive the offence,
  Nor I thy equal, or in years, or sense.
  Thou know'st the errors of unripen'd age,
  Weak are its counsels, headlong is its rage.
  The prize I quit, if thou thy wrath resign;
  The mare, or aught thou ask'st, be freely thine
  Ere I become (from thy dear friendship torn)
  Hateful to thee, and to the gods forsworn."

  So spoke Antilochus; and at the word
  The mare contested to the king restored.
  Joy swells his soul: as when the vernal grain
  Lifts the green ear above the springing plain,
  The fields their vegetable life renew,
  And laugh and glitter with the morning dew;
  Such joy the Spartan's shining face o'erspread,
  And lifted his gay heart, while thus he said:

  "Still may our souls, O generous youth! agree
  'Tis now Atrides' turn to yield to thee.
  ther day!"

  Proud of the gift, thus spake the full of days:
  Achilles heard him, prouder of the praise.

  The prizes next are order'd to the field,
  For the bold champions who the caestus wield.
  A stately mule, as yet by toils unbroke,
  Of six years' age, unconscious of the yoke,
  Is to the circus led, and firmly bound;
  Next stands a goblet, massy, large, and round.
  Achilles rising, thus: "Let Greece excite
  Two heroes equal to this hardy fight;
  Who dare the foe with lifted arms provoke,
  And rush beneath the long-descending stroke.
  On whom Apollo shall the palm bestow,
  And whom the Greeks supreme by conquest know,
  This mule his dauntless labours shall repay,
  The vanquish'd bear the massy bowl away."

  This dreadful combat great Epeus chose;(291)
  High o'er the crowd, enormous bulk! he rose,
  And seized the beast, and thus began to say:
  "Stand forth some man, to bear the bowl away!
  (Price of his ruin: for who dares deny
  This mule my right; the undoubted victor I)
  Others, 'tis own'd, in fields of battle shine,
  But the first honours of this fight are mine;
  For who excels in all? Then let my foe
  Draw near, but first his certain fortune know;
  Secure this hand shall his whole frame confound,
  Mash all his bones, and all his body pound:
  So let his friends be nigh, a needful train,
  To heave the batter'd carcase off the plain."

  The giant spoke; and in a stupid gaze
  The host beheld him, silent with amaze!
  'Twas thou, Euryalus! who durst aspire
  To meet his might, and emulate thy sire,
  The great Mecistheus; who in days of yore
  In Theban games the noblest trophy bore,
  (The games ordain'd dead OEdipus to grace,)
  And singly vanquish the Cadmean race.
  Him great Tydides urges to contend,
  Warm with the hopes of conquest for his friend;
  Officious with the cincture girds him round;
  And to his wrist the gloves of death are bound.
  Amid the circle now each champion stands,
  And poises high in air his,
  And gave to Thoas at the Lemnian port:
  From him descended, good Eunaeus heir'd
  The glorious gift; and, for Lycaon spared,
  To brave Patroclus gave the rich reward:
  Now, the same hero's funeral rites to grace,
  It stands the prize of swiftness in the race.
  A well-fed ox was for the second placed;
  And half a talent must content the last.
  Achilles rising then bespoke the train:
  "Who hope the palm of swiftness to obtain,
  Stand forth, and bear these prizes from the plain."

  The hero said, and starting from his place,
  Oilean Ajax rises to the race;
  Ulysses next; and he whose speed surpass'd
  His youthful equals, Nestor's son, the last.
  Ranged in a line the ready racers stand;
  Pelides poe huge bulk of Ajax Telamon.
  Clad in refulgent steel, on either hand,
  The dreadful chiefs amid the circle stand;
  Louring they meet, tremendous to the sight;
  Each Argive bosom beats with fierce delight.
  Opposed in arms not long they idly stood,
  But thrice they closed, and thrice the charge renew'd.
  A furious pass the spear of Ajax made
  Through the broad shield, but at the corslet stay'd.
  Not thus the foe: his javelin aim'd above
  The buckler's margin, at the neck he drove.
  But Greece, now trembling for her hero's life,
  Bade share the honours, and surcease the strife.
  Yet still the victor's due Tydides gains,
  With him the sword and studded belt remains.

  Then hurl'd the hero, thundering on the ground,
  A mass of iron (an enormous round),
  Whose weight and size the circling Greeks admire,
  Rude from the furnace, and but shaped by fire.
  This mighty quoit Aetion wont to rear,
  And from his whirling arm dismiss in air;
  The giant by Achilles slain, he stow'd
  Among his spoils this memorable load.
  For this, he bids those nervous artists vie,
  That teach the disk to sound along the sky.
  "Let him, whose might can hurl this bowl, arise;
  Who farthest hurls it, take it as his prize;
  If he be one enrich'd with large domain
  Of downs for flocks, and arable for grain,
  Small stock of iron needs that man provide;
  His hinds and swains whole years shall be supplied
  From hence; nor ask the neighbouring city's aid
  For ploughshares, wheels, and all the rural trade."

  Stern Polypoetes stepp'd before the throng,
  And great Leonteus, more than mortal strong;
  Whose force with rival forces to oppose,
  Uprose great Ajax; up Epeus rose.
  Each stood in order: first Epeus threw;
  High o'er the wondering crowds the whirling circle flew.
  Leonteus next a little space surpass'd;
  And third, the strength of godlike Ajax cast.
  O'er both their marks it flew; till fiercely flung
  From Polypoetes' arm the discus sung:
  Far as a,
  And to the ships brave Merion bears the prize.

  To close the funeral games, Achilles last
  A massy spear amid the circle placed,
  And ample charger of unsullied frame,
  With flowers high-wrought, not blacken'd yet by flame.
  For these he bids the heroes prove their art,
  Whose dexterous skill directs the flying dart.
  Here too great Merion hopes the noble prize;
  Nor here disdain'd the king of men to rise.
  With joy Pelides saw the honour paid,
  Rose to the monarch, and respectful said:

  "Thee first in virtue, as in power supreme,
  O king of nations! all thy Greeks proclaim;
  In every martial game thy worth attest,
  And know thee both their greatest and their best.
  Take then the prize, but let brave Merion bear
  This beamy javelin in thy brother's war."

  Pleased from the hero's lips his praise to hear,
  The king to Merion gives the brazen spear:
  But, set apart for sacred use, commands
  The glittering charger to Talthybius' hands.

                          [Illustration: CERES.]

                                  CERES.





BOOK XXIV.


ARGUMENT.

THE REDEMPTION OF THE BODY OF HECTOR.

The gods deliberate about the redemption of Hector's body. Jupiter sends
Thetis to Achilles, to dispose him for the restoring it, and Iris to
Priam, to encourage him to go in person and treat for it. The old king,
notwithstanding the remonstrances of his queen, makes ready for the
journey, to which he is encouraged by an omen from Jupiter. He sets forth
in his chariot, with a waggon loaded with presents, under the charge of
Idaeus the herald. Mercury descends in the shape of a young man, and
conducts him to the pavilion of Achilles. Their conversation on the way.
Priam finds Achilles at his table, casts himself at his feet, and begs for
the body of his son: Achilles, moved with compassion, grants his request,
detains him one night in his tent, and the next morning sends him home
with the body: the Trojans run out to meet him. The lamentatiere Samos wide his forests spreads,
  And rocky Imbrus lifts its pointed heads,
  Down plunged the maid; (the parted waves resound;)
  She plunged and instant shot the dark profound.
  As bearing death in the fallacious bait,
  From the bent angle sinks the leaden weight;
  So pass'd the goddess through the closing wave,
  Where Thetis sorrow'd in her secret cave:
  There placed amidst her melancholy train
  (The blue-hair'd sisters of the sacred main)
  Pensive she sat, revolving fates to come,
  And wept her godlike son's approaching doom.
  Then thus the goddess of the painted bow:
  "Arise, O Thetis! from thy seats below,
  'Tis Jove that calls."--"And why (the dame replies)
  Calls Jove his Thetis to the hated skies?
  Sad object as I am for heavenly sight!
  Ah may my sorrows ever shun the light!
  Howe'er, be heaven's almighty sire obey'd--"
  She spake, and veil'd her head in sable shade,
  Which, flowing long, her graceful person clad;
  And forth she paced, majestically sad.

  Then through the world of waters they repair
  (The way fair Iris led) to upper air.
  The deeps dividing, o'er the coast they rise,
  And touch with momentary flight the skies.
  There in the lightning's blaze the sire they found,
  And all the gods in shining synod round.
  Thetis approach'd with anguish in her face,
  (Minerva rising, gave the mourner place,)
  Even Juno sought her sorrows to console,
  And offer'd from her hand the nectar-bowl:
  She tasted, and resign'd it: then began
  The sacred sire of gods and mortal man:

  "Thou comest, fair Thetis, but with grief o'ercast;
  Maternal sorrows; long, ah, long to last!
  Suffice, we know and we partake thy cares;
  But yield to fate, and hear what Jove declares
  Nine days are past since all the court above
  In Hector's cause have moved the ear of Jove;
  'Twas voted, Hermes from his godlike foe
  By stealth should bear him, but we will'd not so:
  We will, thy son himself the corse restore,
  And to his conquest e, and partner of his way.
  Fierce as he is, Achilles' self shall spare
  His age, nor touch one venerable hair:
  Some thought there must be in a soul so brave,
  Some sense of duty, some desire to save."

     [Illustration: IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR.]

             IRIS ADVISES PRIAM TO OBTAIN THE BODY OF HECTOR.


  Then down her bow the winged Iris drives,
  And swift at Priam's mournful court arrives:
  Where the sad sons beside their father's throne
  Sat bathed in tears, and answer'd groan with groan.
  And all amidst them lay the hoary sire,
  (Sad scene of woe!) his face his wrapp'd attire
  Conceal'd from sight; with frantic hands he spread
  A shower of ashes o'er his neck and head.
  From room to room his pensive daughters roam;
  Whose shrieks and clamours fill the vaulted dome;
  Mindful of those, who late their pride and joy,
  Lie pale and breathless round the fields of Troy!
  Before the king Jove's messenger appears,
  And thus in whispers greets his trembling ears:

  "Fear not, O father! no ill news I bear;
  From Jove I come, Jove makes thee still his care;
  For Hector's sake these walls he bids thee leave,
  And bear what stern Achilles may receive;
  Alone, for so he wills; no Trojan near,
  Except, to place the dead with decent care,
  Some aged herald, who with gentle hand
  May the slow mules and funeral car command.
  Nor shalt thou death, nor shall thou danger dread:
  Safe througse barbarities repay!
  For ah! could Hector merit thus, whose breath
  Expired not meanly, in unactive death?
  He poured his latest blood in manly fight,
  And fell a hero in his country's right."

  "Seek not to stay me, nor my soul affright
  With words of omen, like a bird of night,
  (Replied unmoved the venerable man;)
  'Tis heaven commands me, and you urge in vain.
  Had any mortal voice the injunction laid,
  Nor augur, priest, nor seer, had been obey'd.
  A present goddess brought the high command,
  I saw, I heard her, and the word shall stand.
  I go, ye gods! obedient to your call:
  If in yon camp your powers have doom'd my fall,
  Content--By the same hand let me expire!
  Add to the slaughter'd son the wretched sire!
  One cold embrace at least may be allow'd,
  And my last tears flow mingled with his blood!"

  From forth his open'd stores, this said, he drew
  Twelve costly carpets of refulgent hue,
  As many vests, as many mantles told,
  And twelve fair veils, and garments stiff with gold,
  Two tripods next, and twice two chargers shine,
  With ten pure talents from the richest mine;
  And last a large well-labour'd bowl had place,
  (The pledge of treaties once with friendly Thrace:)
  Seem'd all too mean the stores he could employ,
  For one last look to buy him back to Troy!

  Lo! the sad father, frantic with his pain,
  Around him furious drives his menial train:
  In vain each slave with duteous care attends,
  Each office hurts him, and each face offends.
  "What make ye here, officious crowds! (he cries).
  Hence! nor obtrude your anguish on my eyes.
  Have ye no griefs at home, to fix ye there:
  Am I the only object of despair?
  Am I become my people's common show,
  Set up by Jove your spectacle of woe?
  No, you must feel him too; yourselves must fall;
  The same stern god to ruin gives you all:
  Nor is great Hector lost by me alone;
  Your sole defence, your guardian power is gone!
  I see your blood the fields of Phrygreject advice."

  "'Tis just (said Priam) to the sire above
  To raise our hands; for who so good as Jove?"
  He spoke, and bade the attendant handmaid bring
  The purest water of the living spring:
  (Her ready hands the ewer and bason held:)
  Then took the golden cup his queen had fill'd;
  On the mid pavement pours the rosy wine,
  Uplifts his eyes, and calls the power divine:

  "O first and greatest! heaven's imperial lord!
  On lofty Ida's holy hill adored!
  To stern Achilles now direct my ways,
  And teach him mercy when a father prays.
  If such thy will, despatch from yonder sky
  Thy sacred bird, celestial augury!
  Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race
  Tower on the right of yon ethereal space;
  So shall thy suppliant, strengthen'd from above,
  Fearless pursue the journey mark'd by Jove."

  Jove heard his prayer, and from the throne on high,
  Despatch'd his bird, celestial augury!
  The swift-wing'd chaser of the feather'd game,
  And known to gods by Percnos' lofty name.
  Wide as appears some palace-gate display'd.
  So broad, his pinions stretch'd their ample shade,
  As stooping dexter with resounding wings
  The imperial bird descends in airy rings.
to Achilles' tent."

  The god obeys, his golden pinions binds,(294)
  And mounts incumbent on the wings of winds,
  That high, through fields of air, his flight sustain,
  O'er the wide earth, and o'er the boundless main;
  Then grasps the wand that causes sleep to fly,
  Or in soft slumbers seals the wakeful eye:
  Thus arm'd, swift Hermes steers his airy way,
  And stoops on Hellespont's resounding sea.
  A beauteous youth, majestic and divine,
  He seem'd; fair offspring of some princely line!
  Now twilight veil'd the glaring face of day,
  And clad the dusky fields in sober grey;
  What time the herald and the hoary king
  (Their chariots stopping at the silver spring,
  That circling Ilus' ancient marble flows)
  Allow'd their mules and steeds a short repose,
  Through the dim shade the herald first espies
  A man's approach, and thus to Priam cries:
  "I mark some foe's advance: O king! beware;
  This hard adventure claims thy utmost care!
  For much I fear destruction hovers nigh:
  Our state asks counsel; is it best to fly?
  Or old and helpless, at his feet to fall,
  Two wretched suppliants, and for mercy call?"

  The afflicted monarch shiver'd with despair;
  Pale grew his face, and upright stood his hair;
  Sunk was his heart; his colour went and came;
  A sudden trembling shook his aged frame:
  When Hermes, greeting, touch'd his royal hand,
  And, gentle, thus accosts with kind demand:

  "Say whither, father! when each mortal sight
  Is seal'd in sleep, thou wanderest through the night?
  Why roam thy mules and steeds the plains along,
  Through Grecian foes, so numerous and so strong?
  What couldst thou hope, should these thy treasures view;
  These, who with endless hate thy race pursue?
  For what defence, alas! could'st thou provide;
  Thyself not young, a weak old man thy guide?
  Yet suffer not thy soul to sink with dread;
  relics? what befals him dead?
  Have dogs dismember'd (on the naked plains),
  Or yet unmangled rest, his cold remains?"

  "O favour'd of the skies! (thus answered then
  The power that mediates between god and men)
  Nor dogs nor vultures have thy Hector rent,
  But whole he lies, neglected in the tent:
  This the twelfth evening since he rested there,
  Untouch'd by worms, untainted by the air.
  Still as Aurora's ruddy beam is spread,
  Round his friend's tomb Achilles drags the dead:
  Yet undisfigured, or in limb or face,
  All fresh he lies, with every living grace,
  Majestical in death! No stains are found
  O'er all the corse, and closed is every wound,
  Though many a wound they gave. Some heavenly care,
  Some hand divine, preserves him ever fair:
  Or all the host of heaven, to whom he led
  A life so grateful, still regard him dead."

  Thus spoke to Priam the celestial guide,
  And joyful thus the royal sire replied:
  "Blest is the man who pays the gods above
  The constant tribute of respect and love!
  Those who inhabit the Olympian bower
  My son forgot not, in exalted power;
  And heaven, that every virtue bears in mind,
  Even to the ashes of the just is kind.
  But thou, O generous youth! this goblet take,
  A pledge of gratitude for Hector's sake;
  And while the favouring gods our steps survey,
  Safe to Pelides' tent conduct my way."

  To whom the latent god: "O king, forbear
  To tempt my youth, for apt is youth to err.
  But can I, absent from my prince's sight,
  Take gifts in secret, that must shun the light?
  What from our master's interest thus we draw,
  Is but a licensed theft that 'scapes the law.
  Respecting him, my soul abjures the offence;
  And as the crime, I dread the consequence.
  Thee, far as Argos, pleased I could convey;
  Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way:
  On thee attend, thy safety to maintain,
  O'er pathless forests, or the roaring main."

  He said, then took the chariot at a bound,
  And sne silver hairs, that venerable face;
  His trembling limbs, his helpless person, see!
  In all my equal, but in misery!
  Yet now, perhaps, some turn of human fate
  Expels him helpless from his peaceful state;
  Think, from some powerful foe thou seest him fly,
  And beg protection with a feeble cry.
  Yet still one comfort in his soul may rise;
  He hears his son still lives to glad his eyes,
  And, hearing, still may hope a better day
  May send him thee, to chase that foe away.
  No comfort to my griefs, no hopes remain,
  The best, the bravest, of my sons are slain!
  Yet what a race! ere Greece to Ilion came,
  The pledge of many a loved and loving dame:
  Nineteen one mother bore--Dead, all are dead!
  How oft, alas! has wretched Priam bled!
  Still one was left their loss to recompense;
  His father's hope, his country's last defence.
  Him too thy rage has slain! beneath thy steel,
  Unhappy in his country's cause he fell!

  "For him through hostile camps I bent my way,
  For him thus prostrate at thy feet I lay;
  Large gifts proportion'd to thy wrath I bear;
  O hear the wretched, and the gods revere!

  "Think of thy father, and this face
  A strength proportion'd to the woes you feel.
  Rise, then: let reason mitigate your caIn riches once, in children once excell'd;
  Extended Phrygia own'd thy ample reign,
  And all fair Lesbos' blissful seats contain,
  And all wide Hellespont's unmeasured main.
  But since the god his hand has pleased to turn,
  And fill thy measure from his bitter urn,
  What sees the sun, but hapless heroes' falls?
  War, and the blood of men, surround thy walls!
  What must be, must be. Bear thy lot, nor shed
  These unavailing sorrows o'er the dead;
  Thou canst not call him from the Stygian shore,
  But thou, alas! may'st live to suffer more!"

  To whom the king: "O favour'd of the skies!
  Here let me grow to earth! since Hector lies
  On the bare beach deprived of obsequies.
  O give me Hector! to my eyes restore
  His corse, and take the gifts: I ask no more.
  Thou, as thou may'st, these boundless stores enjoy;
  Safe may'st thou sail, and turn thy wrath from Troy;
  So shall thy pity and forbearance give
  A weak old man to see the light and live!"

  "Move me no more, (Achilles thus replies,
  While kindling anger sparkled in his eyes,)
  Nor seek by tears my steady soul to bend:
  To yield thy Hector I myself intend:
  For know, from Jove my goddess-mother came,
  (Old Ocean's daughter, silver-footed dame,)
  Nor comest thou but by heaven; nor comest alone,
  Some god impels with courage not thy own:
  No human hand the weighty gates unbarr'd,
  Nor could the boldest of our youth have dared
  To pass our outworks, or elude the guard.
  Cease; lest, neglectful of high Jove's command,
  I show thee, king! thou tread'st on hostile land;
  Release my knees, thy suppliant arts give o'er,
  And shake the purpose of my soul no more."

  The sire obey'd him, trembling and o'eraw'd.
  Achilles, like a lion, rush'd abroad:
  Automedon and Alcimus attend,
  (Whom most he honour'd, since he lost his friend,)
  These to unyoke the mules and horses went,
  And led the hoary herald to the tent;
  Next, heap'd on high, the numerous presents bear,
  (Great Hecer spoke:

  "Permit me now, beloved of Jove! to steep
  My careful temples in the dew of sleep:
  For, since the day that number'd with the dead
  My hapless son, the dust has been my bed;
  Soft sleep a stranger to my weeping eyes;
  My only food, my sorrows and my sighs!
  Till now, encouraged by the grace you give,
  I share thy banquet, and consent to live."

  With that, Achilles bade prepare the bed,
  With purple soft and shaggy carpets spread;
  Forth, by the flaming lights, they bend their way,
  And place the couches, and the coverings lay.
  Then he: "Now, father, sleep, but sleep not here;
  Consult thy safety, and forgive my fear,
  Lest any Argive, at this hour awake,
  To ask our counsel, or our orders take,
  Approaching sudden to our open'd tent,
  Perchance behold thee, and our grace prevent.
  Should such report thy honour'd person here,
  The king of men the ransom might defer;
  But say with speed, if aught of thy desire
  Remains unask'd; what time the rites require
  To inter thy Hector? For, so long we stay
  Our slaughtering arm, and bid the hosts obey."

  "If then thy will permit (the monarch said)
  To finish all due honours to the dead,
  This of thy grace accord: to thee are known
  The fears of Ilion, closed within her town;
  And at what distance from our walls aspire
  The hills of Ide, and forests for the fire.
  Nine days to vent our sorrows I request,
  The tenth shall see the funeral and the feast;
  The next, to raise his monument be given;
  The twelfth we war, if war be doom'd by heaven!"

  "This thy request (replied the chief) enjoy:
  Till then our arms suspend the fall of Troy."

  Then gave his hand at parting, to prevent
  The old man's fears, and turn'd within the tent;
  Where fair Briseis, bright in blooming charms,
  Expects her hero with desiring arms.
  But in the porch the king and herald rest;
  Sad dreams of care yet wandering in their breast.
  Now gods and men the gifts of sleep partake;
  Industal groan.
  At Scaea's gates they meet the mourning wain,
  Hang on the wheels, and grovel round the slain.
  The wife and mother, frantic with despair,
  Kiss his pale cheek, and rend their scatter'd hair:
  Thus wildly wailing, at the gates they lay;
  And there had sigh'd and sorrow'd out the day;
  But godlike Priam from the chariot rose:
  "Forbear (he cried) this violence of woes;
  First to the palace let the car proceed,
  Then pour your boundless sorrows o'er the dead."

  The waves of people at his word divide,
  Slow rolls the chariot through the following tide;
  Even to the palace the sad pomp they wait:
  They weep, and place him on the bed of state.
  A melancholy choir attend around,
  With plaintive sighs, and music's solemn sound:
  Alternately they sing, alternate flow
  The obedient tears, melodious in their woe.
  While deeper sorrows groan from each full heart,
  And nature speaks at every pause of art.

  First to the corse the weeping consort flew;
  Around his neck her milk-white arms she threw,
  "And oh, my Hector! Oh, my lord! (she cries)
  Snatch'd in thy bloom from these desiring eyes!
  Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!
  And I abandon'd, desolate, alone!
  An only son, once comfort of our pains,
  Sad product now of hapless love, remains!
  Never to manly age that son shall rise,
  Or with increasing graces glad my eyes:
  For Ilion now (her great defender slain)
  Shall sink a smoking ruin on the plain.
  Who now protects her wives with guardian care?
  Who saves her infants from the rage of war?
  Now hostile fleets must waft those infants o'er
  (Those wives must wait them) to a foreign shore:
  Thou too, my son, to barbarous climes shall go,
  The sad companion of thy mother's woe;
  Driven hence a slave before the victor's sword
  Condemn'd to toil for some inhuman lord:
  Or else some Greek whose father press'd the plain,
  Or son, or brother, by great Hector slain,
  In Hector's blood his vengeance shall enjoy,d thou would'st have spoke, which, sadly dear,
  My soul might keep, or utter with a tear;
  Which never, never could be lost in air,
  Fix'd in my heart, and oft repeated there!"

  Thus to her weeping maids she makes her moan,
  Her weeping handmaids echo groan for groan.

  The mournful mother next sustains her part:
  "O thou, the best, the dearest to my heart!
  Of all my race thou most by heaven approved,
  And by the immortals even in death beloved!
  While all my other sons in barbarous bands
  Achilles bound, and sold to foreign lands,
  This felt no chains, but went a glorious ghost,
  Free, and a hero, to the Stygian coast.
  Sentenced, 'tis true, by his inhuman doom,
  Thy noble corse was dragg'd around the tomb;
  (The tomb of him thy warlike arm had slain;)
  Ungenerous insult, impotent and vain!
  Yet glow'st thou fresh with every living grace;
  No mark of pain, or violence of face:
  Rosy and fair! as Phoebus' silver bow
  Dismas the subject of the
poem, and the nature of epic poetry would not permit our author to proceed
to the event of the war, it perhaps may be acceptable to the common reader
to give a short account of what happened to Troy and the chief actors in
this poem after the conclusion of it.

I need not mention that Troy was taken soon after the death of Hector by
the stratagem of the wooden horse, the particulars of which are described
by Virgil in the second book of the Ćneid.

Achilles fell before Troy, by the hand of Paris, by the shot of an arrow
in his heel, as Hector had prophesied at his death, lib. xxii.

The unfortunate Priam was killed by Pyrrhus, the son of Achilles.

Ajax, after the death of Achilles, had a contest with Ulysses for the
armour of Vulcan, but being defeated in his aim, he slew himself through
indignation.

Helen, after the death of Paris, married Deiphobus his brother, and at the
taking of Troy betrayed him, in order to reconcile herself to Menelaus her
first husband, who received her again into favour.

Agamemnon at his return was barbarously murde to a conclusion,
I desire to dedicate it, and to have the honour and satisfaction of
placing together, in this manner, the names of Mr. CONGREVE, and of

March 25, 1720

                                                                   A. POPE

Ton theon de eupoiia--to mae epi pleon me procophai en poiaetikn kai allois
epitaeoeimasi en ois isos a kateschethaen, ei aesthomaen emautan euodos
proionta.

                           M. AUREL ANTON _de Seipso,_ lib. i. Section 17.





END OF THE ILLIAD






FOOTNOTES


    1 "What," says Archdeacon Wilberforce, "is the natural root of loyalty
      as distinguished from such mere selfish desire of personal security
      as is apt to take its place in civilized times, but that
      consciousness of a natural bond among the families of men which
      gives a fellow-feeling to whole clans and nations, and thus enlists
      their affections in behalf of those time-honoured representatives of
      their ancient blood, in whose success they feel a personal interest?
      Hence the delight when we recognize an act of nobility or justice in
      our hereditary princes

        "'Tuque prior, tu parce genus qui ducis Olympo,
        Projice tela manu _sanguis meus_'

      "So strong is this feeling, that it regains an engrafted influence
      even when history witnesses that vast convulsions have rent and
      weakened it and the Celtic feeling towards the Stuarts has been
      rekindled in our own days towards the grand daughter of George the
      Third of Hanover.

      "Somewhat similar may be seen in the disposition to idolize those
      great lawgivers of man's race, who have given expression, in the
      immortal language of song, to the deeper inspirations of our nature.
      The thoughts of Homer or of Shakespere are the universal inheritance
      of the human race. In this mutual ground every man meets his
      brother, they have been bet forth by the providence of God to
      vindic melody
      were regarded by the listeners, hence it was necessary for him to
      remain intelligible to all. In countries where nothing similar is
      found, it is difficult to represent such scenes to the mind; but
      whoever has had an opportunity of listening to the improvisation of
      Italy, can easily form an idea of Demodocus and Phemius."--_Ancient
      Greece,_ p. 94.

    4 "Should it not be, since _my_ arrival? asks Mackenzie, observing
      that "poplars can hardly live so long".  But setting aside the fact
      that we must not expect consistency in a mere romance, the ancients
      had a superstitious belief in the great age of trees which grew near
      places consecrated by the presence of gods and great men. See Cicero
      de Legg II I, sub init., where he speaks of the plane tree under
      which Socrates used to walk and of the tree at Delos, where Latona
      gave birth to Apollo. This passage is referred to by Stephanus of
      Byzantium, _s. v._ N. T. p. 490, ed. de Pinedo. I omit quoting any
      of the dull epigrams ascribed to Homer for, as Mr. Justice Talfourd
      rightly observes, "The authenticity of these fragments depends upon
      that of the pseudo Herodotean Life of Homer, from which they are
      taken." c. de Hom. Poes. c. 15; Apul. de Deo Socrat. s.
      f.

   14 Vit. Hom. Section 28.

   15 The riddle is given in Section 35. Compare Mackenzie's note, p. xxx.

   16 Heeren's Ancient Greece, p. 96.

   17 Compare Sir E. L. Bulwer's Caxtons v. i. p. 4.

   18 Pericles and Aspasia, Letter lxxxiv., Works, vol ii. p. 387.

   19 Quarterly Review, No. lxxxvii., p. 147.

   20 Viz., the following beautiful passage, for the translation of which
      I am indebted to Coleridge, Classic Poets, p. 286.

          "Origias, farewell! and oh! remember me
          Hereafter, when some stranger from the sea,
          A hapless wanderer, may your isle explore,
          And ask you, maid, of all the bards you boast,
          Who sings the sweetest, and delights you most
          Oh! answer all,--'A blind old man and poor
        Sweetest he sings--and dwells on Chios' rocky shore.'"

                                                   _See_ Thucyd. iii, 104.

   21 Longin., de Sublim., ix. Section 26. Othen en tae Odysseia
      pareikasai tis an kataduomeno ton Omaeron haelio, oo dixa taes
      sphodrotaetos paramenei to megethos

   22 See Tatian, quoted in Fabric. Bibl. Gr. v. II t. ii. Mr. Mackenzie
      has given three brief but elaborate papers on the different writers
      on the subject, which deserve to be consulted. See Notes and
      Queries, vol. v. pp. 99, 171, and 221. His own views are moderate,
      and perhaps as satisfactory, on the whole, as any of the hypotheses
      hitherto put forth. In fact, they consist in an attempt to blend
      those hypotheses into something like consistency, rather than in
      advocating any individual theory.

   23 Letters to Phileleuth; Lips.

   24 Hist. of Greece, vol. ii. p. 191, sqq.

   25 It is, indeed not easy to calculate the height to which the memory
      may be cultivated. To take an ordinary case, we might refer to that
      of any first rate actor, who must be prepared, at a very short
   ven this instance is less wonderful than one as to
      which we may appeal to any of our readers that happened some twenty
      years ago to visit the town of Stirling, in Scotland. No such person
      can have forgotten the poor, uneducated man Blind Jamie who could
      actually repeat, after a few minutes consideration any verse
      required from any part of the Bible--even the obscurest and most
      unimportant enumeration of mere proper names not excepted. We do not
      mention these facts as touching the more difficult part of the
      question before us, but facts they are; and if we find so much
      difficulty in calculating the extent to which the mere memory may be
      cultivated, are we, in these days of multifarious reading, and of
      countless distracting affairs, fair judges of the perfection to
      which the invention and the memory combined may attain in a simpler
      age, and among a more single minded people?--Quarterly Review, _l.
      c.,_ p. 143, sqq.

      Heeren steers between the two opinions, observing that, "The
      Dschungariade of the Calmucks is said to surpass the poems of Homer
      in length, as much as it stands beneath them in merit, and yet it
      exists only in the memory of a people which is not unacquainted with
      writing. But the songs of a nation are probably the last things
      which are committed to writing, for the very reason that they are
      remembered."-- _Ancient Greece._ p. 100.

   26 Vol. II p. 198, sqq.

   27 Quarterly Review, _l. c.,_ p. 131 sq.

   28 Betrachtungen uber die Ilias. Berol. 1841. See Grote, p. 204. Notes
      and Queries, vol. v. p. 221.

   29 Prolegg. pp. xxxii., xxxvi., &c.

   30 Vol. ii. p. 214 sqq.

   31 "Who," says Cicero, de Orat. iii. 34, "was more learned in that age,
      or whose eloquence is reported to have been more perfected by
      literature than that of Peisistratus, who is said first to have
      disposed the books of Homer in the ordticulars,
      is translated from Bitaube, and is, perhaps, the neatest summary
      that has ever been drawn up:--"A hero, injured by his general, and
      animated with a noble resentment, retires to his tent; and for a
      season withdraws himself and his troops from the war. During this
      interval, victory abandons the army, which for nine years has been
      occupied in a great enterprise, upon the successful termination of
      which the honour of their country depends. The general, at length
      opening his eyes to the fault which he had committed, deputes the
      principal officers of his army to the incensed hero, with commission
      to make compensation for the injury, and to tender magnificent
      presents. The hero, according to the proud obstinacy of his
      character, persists in his animosity; the army is again defeated,
      and is on the verge of entire destruction. This inexorable man has a
      friend; this friend weeps before him, and asks for the hero's arms,
      and for permission to go to the war in his stead. The eloquence of
      friendship prevails more than the intercession of the ambassadors or
      the gifts of the general. He lends his armour to his friend, but
      commands him not to engage with the chief of the enemy's army,
      because he reserves to himself the honour of that combat, and
      because he also fears for his friend's life. The prohibition is
      forgotten; the friend listens to nothing but his courage; his corpse
      is brought back to the hero, and the hero's arms become the prize of
      the conqueror. Then the hero, given up to the most lively despair,
      prepares to fight; he receives from a divinity new armour, is
      reconciled with his general and, thirsting for glory and revenge,
      enacts prodigies of valour, recovers the victory, slays the enemy's
      chief, honours his friend with superb funeral rites, and exercises a
      cruel vengeance on the body of his destroyer;  agent of her most awful dispensations? The close union of the
      arts of prophecy and song explains his additional office of god of
      music, while the arrows with which he and his sister were armed,
      symbols of sudden death in every age, no less naturally procured him
      that of god of archery. Of any connection between Apollo and the
      Sun, whatever may have existed in the more esoteric doctrine of the
      Greek sanctuaries, there is no trace in either Iliad or
      Odyssey."--Mure, "History of Greek Literature," vol. i. p. 478, sq.

   51 It has frequently been observed, that most pestilences begin with
      animals, and that Homer had this fact in mind.

   52 --_Convened to council._ The public assembly in the heroic times is
      well characterized by Grote, vol. ii. p 92. "It is an assembly for
      talk. Communication and discussion to a certain extent by the chiefs
      in person, of the people as listeners and sympathizers--often for
      eloquence, and sometimes for quarrel--but here its ostensible
      purposes end."

   53 Old Jacob Duport, whose "Gnomologia Homerica" is full of curious and
      useful things, quotes several passages of the ancients, in which
      reference is made to these words of Homer, in maintenance of the
      belief that dreams had a divine origin and an import in which men
      were interested.

   54 Rather, "bright-eyed." See the German critics quoted by Arnold.

   55 The prize given to Ajax was Tecmessa, while Ulysses received
      Laodice, the daughter of Cycnus.

   56 The Myrmidons dwelt on the southern borders of Thessaly, and took
      their origin from Myrmido, son of Jupiter and Eurymedusa. It is
      fancifully supposed that the name was derived from myrmaex, an
      _ant,_ "because they imitated the diligence of the ants, and like
      them were indefatigable, continually employed in cultivating the
      earth; the change from ants to men is founded merely on the
      equivocat  difficulty, succeeded in obtaining her hand, as she eluded him by
      assuming various forms. Her children were all destroyed by fire
      through her attempts to see whether they were immortal, and Achilles
      would have shared the same fate had not his father rescued him. She
      afterwards rendered him invulnerable by plunging him into the waters
      of the Styx, with the exception of that part of the heel by which
      she held him. Hygin. Fab. 54

   62 Thebe was a city of Mysia, north of Adramyttium.

   63 That is, defrauds me of the prize allotted me by their votes.

   64 Quintus Calaber goes still further in his account of the service
      rendered to Jove by Thetis:

        "Nay more, the fetters of Almighty Jove
        She loosed"--Dyce's "Calaber," s. 58.

   65 --_To Fates averse._ Of the gloomy destiny reigning throughout the
      Homeric poems, and from which even the gods are not exempt, Schlegel
      well observes, "This power extends also to the world of gods-- for
      the Grecian gods are mere powers of nature--and although immeasurably
      higher than mortal man, yet, compared with infinitude, they are on
      an equal footing with himself."--'Lectures on the Drama' v. p. 67.

   66 It has been observed that the annual procession of the sacred ship
      so often represented on Egyptian monuments, and the return of the
      deity from Ethiopia after some days' absence, serves to show the
      Ethiopian origin of Thebes, and of the worship of Jupiter Ammon. "I
      think," says Heeren, after quoting a passage from Diodorus about the
      holy ship, "that this procession is represented in one of the great
      sculptured reliefs on the temple of Karnak. The sacred ship of Ammon
      is on the shore with its whole equipment, and is towed along by
      another boat. It is therefore on its voyage. This must have been one
      of the most celebrated festivals, since, even according to the
      interpretation of antiquity  Phidias, or whether Phidias had been carried thither to contemplate
      the god."-- "Elgin Marbles," vol. xii p.124.

           71 "So was his will
          Pronounced among the gods, and by an oath,
          That shook heav'n's whole circumference, confirm'd."

                                                  "Paradise Lost" ii. 351.

   72 --_A double bowl, i.e._ a vessel with a cup at both ends, something
      like the measures by which a halfpenny or pennyworth of nuts is
      sold. See Buttmann, Lexic. p. 93 sq.

   73 "Paradise Lost," i. 44.

          "Him th' Almighty power
        Hurl'd headlong flaming from th ethereal sky,
        With hideous ruin and combustion"

   74 The occasion on which Vulcan incurred Jove's displeasure was
      this--After Hercules, had taken and pillaged Troy, Juno raised a
      storm, which drove him to the island of Cos, having previously cast
      Jove into a sleep, to prevent him aiding his son. Jove, in revenge,
      fastened iron anvils to her feet, and hung her from the sky, and
      Vulcan, attempting to relieve her, was kicked down from Olympus in
      the manner described. The allegorists have gone mad in finding deep
      explanations for this amusing fiction. See Heraclides, 'Ponticus,"
      p. 463 sq., ed Gale. The story is told by Homer himself in Book xv.
      The Sinthians were a race of robbers, the ancient inhabitants of
      Lemnos which island was ever after sacred to Vulcan.

        "Nor was his name unheard or unadored
        In ancient Greece, and in Ausonian land
        Men call'd him Mulciber, and how he fell
        From heaven, they fabled, thrown by angry Jove
        Sheer o'er the crystal battlements from morn
        To noon he fell, from noon to dewy eve,
        A summer's day and with the setting sun
        Dropp'd from the zenith like a falling star
        On Lemnos, th' Aegean isle thus they relate."

                                                   "Paradise Lomate will. Compare
      "Paradise Lost," v. 646:

          "And roseate dews disposed
        All but the unsleeping eyes of God to rest."

   77 --_Dream_ ought to be spelt with a capital letter, being, I think,
      evidently personified as the god of dreams. See Anthon and others.

        "When, by Minerva sent, a _fraudful_ Dream
        Rush'd from the skies, the bane of her and Troy."

                  Dyce's "Select Translations from Quintus Calaber," p.10.

           78 "Sleep'st thou, companion dear, what sleep can close
        Thy eye-lids?"

                                                 --"Paradise Lost," v. 673.

   79 This truly military sentiment has been echoed by the approving voice
      of many a general and statesman of antiquity. See Pliny's Panegyric
      on Trajan. Silius neatly translates it,


          "Turpe duci totam somno consumere noctem."


   80 --_The same in habit, &c._

        "To whom once more the winged god appears;
        His former youthful mien and shape he wears."

                                                 Dryden's Virgil, iv. 803.

           81 "As bees in spring-time, when
        The sun with Taurus rides,
        Pour forth their populous youth about the hive
        we find the maxim propounded by Creon in
      the Antigone of Sophocles. See some important remarks of Heeren,
      "Ancient Greece," ch. vi. p. 105.

   87 It may be remarked, that the character of Thersites, revolting and
      contemptible as it is, serves admirably to develop the disposition
      of Ulysses in a new light, in which mere cunning is less prominent.
      Of the gradual and individual development of Homer's heroes,
      Schlegel well observes, "In bas-relief the figures are usually in
      profile, and in the epos all are characterized in the simplest
      manner in relief; they are not grouped together, but follow one
      another; so Homer's heroes advance, one by one, in succession before
      us. It has been remarked that the _Iliad_ is not definitively
      closed, but that we are left to suppose something both to precede
      and to follow it. The bas-relief is equally without limit, and may
      be continued _ad infinitum,_ either from before or behind, on which
      account the ancients preferred for it such subjects as admitted of
      an indefinite extension, sacrificial processions, dances, and lines
      of combatants, and hence they also exhibit bas-reliefs on curved
      surfaces, such as vases, or the frieze of a rotunda, where, by the
      curvature, the two ends are withdrawn from our sight, and where,
      while we advance, one object appears as another disappears. Reading
      Homer is very much like such a circuit; the present object alone
      arresting our attention, we lose sight of what precedes, and do not
      concern ourselves about what is to follow."--"Dramatic Literature,"
      p. 75.

   88 "There cannot be a clearer indication than this description --so
      graphic in the original poem--of the true character of the Homeric
      agora. The multitude who compose it are listening and acquiescent,
      not often hesitating, and never refractory to the chief. The fate
      which awaits a presumptuous limb, healthy, and
      without blemish."--"Elgin Marbles," vol. i. p. 78.

   93 --_Idomeneus,_ son of Deucalion, was king of Crete. Having vowed,
      during a tempest, on his return from Troy, to sacrifice to Neptune
      the first creature that should present itself to his eye on the
      Cretan shore, his son fell a victim to his rash vow.

   94 --_Tydeus' son, i.e._ Diomed.

   95 That is, Ajax, the son of Oileus, a Locrian. He must be
      distinguished from the other, who was king of Salamis.

   96 A great deal of nonsense has been written to account for the word
      _unbid,_ in this line. Even Plato, "Sympos." p. 315, has found some
      curious meaning in what, to us, appears to need no explanation. Was
      there any _heroic_ rule of etiquette which prevented one
      brother-king visiting another without a formal invitation?

   97 Fresh water fowl, especially swans, were found in great numbers
      about the Asian Marsh, a fenny tract of country in Lydia, formed by
      the river Cayster, near its mouth. See Virgil, "Georgics," vol. i.
      383, sq.

   98 --_Scamander,_ or Scamandros, was a river of Troas, rising, according
      to Strabo, on the highest part of Mount Ida, in the same hill with
      the Granicus and the OEdipus, and falling into the sea at Sigaeum;
      everything tends to identify it with Mendere, as Wood, Rennell, and
      others maintain; the Mendere is 40 miles long, 300 feet broad, deep
      in the time of flood, nearly dry in the summer. Dr. Clarke
      successfully combats the opinion of those who make the Scamander to
      have arisen from the springs of Bounabarshy, and traces the source
      of the river to the highest mountain in the chain of Ida, now
      Kusdaghy; receives the Simois in its course; towards its mouth it is
      very muddy, and flows through marshes. Between the Scamander and
      Simois, Homer's Troy is supposed to have stood: this river,
      e. Bryant, comparing it
      with the allied army at Platae, thinks it so large as to prove the
      entire falsehood of the whole story; and his reasonings and
      calculations are, for their curiosity, well worth a careful
      perusal."--Coleridge, p. 211, sq.

  103 The mention of Corinth is an anachronism, as that city was called
      Ephyre before its capture by the Dorians. But Velleius, vol. i. p.
      3, well observes, that the poet would naturally speak of various
      towns and cities by the names by which they were known in his own
      time.

          104 "Adam, the goodliest man of men since born,
        His sons, the fairest of her daughters Eve.'

                                                --"Paradise Lost," iv. 323.

  105 --_Ćsetes' tomb._ Monuments were often built on the sea-coast, and of
      a considerable height, so as to serve as watch-towers or land marks.
      See my notes to my prose translations of the "Odyssey," ii. p. 21,
      or on Eur. "Alcest." vol. i. p. 240.

  106 --_Zeleia,_ another name for Lycia. The inhabitants were greatly
      devoted to the worship of Apollo. See Muller, "Dorians," vol. i. p.
      248.

  107 --_Barbarous tongues._ "Various as were the dialects of the
      Greeks--and these differences existed not only between the several
      tribes, but even between neighbouring cities--they yet acknowledged
      in their language that they formed but one nation were but branches
      of the same family. Homer has 'men of other tongues:' and yet Homer
      had no general name for the Greek nation."--Heeren, "Ancient Greece,"
      Section vii. p. 107, sq.

        _  108 The cranes._
        "Marking the tracts of air, the clamorous cranes
        Wheel their due flight in varied ranks descried:
        And each with outstretch'd neck his rank maintains,
        In marshall'd order through th' ethereal void."

                            Lorenzo de Medici, in Roscoe's Life, Appendix.

            er he was first a man and then became
      afterwards a god; but Apollodorus professed to fix the exact date of
      his apotheosis. Throughout all the historical ages the descendants
      of Asklepius were numerous and widely diffused. The many families or
      gentes, called Asklepiads, who devoted themselves to the study and
      practice of medicine, and who principally dwelt near the temples of
      Asklepius, whither sick and suffering men came to obtain relief--all
      recognized the god not merely as the object of their common worship,
      but also as their actual progenitor."--Grote vol. i. pe body in which a wound would be immediately
      mortal.

  142 --_Ćnus,_ a fountain almost proverbial for its coldness.

  143 Compare Tasso, Gier. Lib., xx. 7:

        "Nuovo favor del cielo in lui niluce
        E 'l fa grande, et angusto oltre il costume.
        Gl' empie d' honor la faccia, e vi riduce
        Di giovinezza il bel purpureo lume."

          144 "Or deluges, descending on the plains,
        Sweep o'er the yellow year, destroy the pains
        Of lab'ring oxen, and the peasant's gains;
        Uproot the forest oaks, and bear away
        Flocks, folds, and trees, an undistinguish'd prey."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil ii. 408.

  145 --_From mortal mists._

          "But to nobler sights
        Michael from Adam's eyes the film removed."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," xi. 411.

  146 --_The race of those._

        "A pair of coursers, born of heav'nly breed,
        Who from their nostrils breathed ethereal fire;
        Whom Circe stole from her celestial sire,
        By substituting mares produced on earth,
        Whose wombs conceived a more than mortal birth.

                                           Dryden's Virgil, vii. 386, sqq.

  147 The belief in the existence of men of larger stature in earlier
      times, is by no means confined to Homer.

  148 --_Such stream, i.e._ the _ichor,_ or blood of the gods.

        "A stream of nect'rous humour issuing flow'd,
        Sanguine, such as celestial spirits may bleed."

                                                 "Paradise Lost," vi. 339.

  149 This was during the wars with the Titans.

  150 --_Amphitryon's son,_ Hercules, born to Jove by Alcmena, the wife of
      Amphitryon.

  151 --_Ćgiale_ daughter of Adrastus. The Cyclic poets (See Anthon's
      Lempriere, _s. v._) assert Venus incited her to infidelity, in
      revenge for the wound she had received from her husband.

 ndered by men of uncommonly strong voices; the
      battle of Honain was restored by the shouts and menaces of Abbas,
      the uncle of Mohammed," &c.--Coleridge, p. 213.

          159 "Long had the wav'ring god the ly foe:
        They weep; they beat their breasts; they rend their hair,
        And rich embroider'd vests for presents bear."

                                                   Dryden's Virgil, i. 670

  167 The manner in which this episode is introduced, is well illustrated
      by the following remarks of Mure, vol. i. p.298: "The poet's method
      of introducing his episode, also, illustrates in a curious manner
      his tact in the dramatic department of his art. Where, for example,
      one or more heroes are despatched on some commission, to be executed
      at a certain distance of time or place, the fulfilment of this task
      is not, as a general rule, immediately described. A certain interval
      is allowed them for reaching the appointed scene of action, which
      interval is dramatised, as it were, either by a temporary
      continuation of the previous narrative, or by fixing attention for a
      while on some new transaction, at the close of which the further
      account of the mission is resumed."

  168 --_With tablets sealed._ These probably were only devices of a
      hieroglyphical character. Whether writing was known in the Homeric
      times is utterly uncertain. See Grote, vol ii. p. 192, sqq.

  169 --_Solymaean crew,_ a people of Lycia.

  170 From this "melancholy madness" of Bellerophon, hypochondria received
      the name of "Morbus Bellerophonteus." See my notes in my prose
      translation, p. 112. The "Aleian field," _i.e._ "the plain of
      wandering," was situated between the rivers Pyramus and Pinarus, in
      Cilicia.

  171 --_His own, of gold._ This bad bargain has passed into a common
      proverb. See Aulus Gellius, ii, 23.

  172 --_Scaean, i e._ left hand.

  173 --_In fifty chambers._

        "The fifty nuptial beds, (such hopes had he,
        So large a promise of a progeny,)
        The ports of plated gold, and hung with spoils."

                                                   Dryden
      which there is some little doubt. Some take it for a different kind
      of cap or helmet, others for the rim, others for the cone, of the
      helmet.

  178 --_Athenian maid:_ Minerva.

  179 --_Celadon,_ a river of Elis.

  180 --_Oileus, i.e._ Ajax, the son of Oileus, in contradistinction to
      Ajax, son of Telamon.

  181 --_In the general's helm._ It was customary to put the lots into a
      helmet, in which they were well shaken up; each man then took his
      choice.

  182 --_God of Thrace._ Mars, or Mavors, according to his Thracian
      epithet. Hence "Mavortia Moenia."

  183 --_Grimly he smiled._

          "And death
        Grinn'd horribly a ghastly smile."

                                                --"Paradise Lost," ii. 845.

          "There Mavors stands
        Grinning with ghastly feature."

                                                  --Carey's Dante: Hell, v.

          184 "Sete o guerrieri, incomincio Pindoro,
        Con pari honor di pari ambo possenti,
        Dunque cessi la pugna, e non sian rotte
        Le ragioni, e 'l riposo, e de la notte."

                                                       --Gier. Lib. vi. 51.

  185 It was an ancient style of compliment to give a larger portion of
      food to the conqueror, or person to whom respect was to be shown.
      See Virg. Ćn. viii. 181. Thus Benjamin was honoured with a "double
      portion." Gen. xliii. 34.

  186 --_Embattled walls._ "Another essential basis of mechanical unity in
      the poem is the construction of the rampart. This takes place in the
      seventh book. The reason ascribed for the glaring improbability that
      the Greeks should have left their camp and fleet unfortified during
      nine years, in the midst of a hostile country, is a purely poetical
      one: 'So long as Achilles fought, the terror of his name sufficed to
      keep every foe at a distance.' The disasters consequent on his
      secession firs modest calmness and
      respect with which Nestor addresses Agamemnon, observes, "The
      Homeric Council is a purely consultative body, assembled not with
      any power of peremptorily arresting mischievous resolves of the
      king, but solely for his information and guidance."

  201 In the heroic times, it is not unfrequent for the king to receive
      presents to purchase freedom from his wrath, or immunity from his
      exactions. Such gifts gradually became regular, and formed the
      income of the German, (Tacit. Germ. Section 15) Persian, (Herodot.
      iii.89), and other kings. So, too, in the middle ages, 'The fee most ancient superstitions
      respecting prayer, and one founded as much in nature as in
      tradition.

  207 It must be recollected, that the war at Troy was not a settled
      siege, and that many of the chieftains busied themselves in
      piratical expeditions about its neighborhood. Such a one was that of
      which Achilles now speaks. From the following verses, it is evident
      that fruits of these maraudings went to the common support of the
      expedition, and not to the successful plunderer.

  208 --_Pthia,_ the capital of Achilles' Thessalian domains.

  209 --_Orchomenian town._ The topography of Orchomenus, in Boeotia,
      "situated," as it was, "on the northern bank of the lake Ćpais,
      which receives not only the river Cephisus from the valleys of
      Phocis, but also other rivers from Parnassus and Helicon" (Grote,
      vol. p. 181), was a sufficient reason for its prosperity and decay.
      "As long as the channels of these waters were diligently watched and
      kept clear, a large portion of the lake was in the condition of
      alluvial land, pre-eminently rich and fertile. But when the channels
      came to be either neglected, or designedly choked up by an enemy,
      the water accumulated in such a degree as to occupy the soil of more
      than one ancient islet, and to occasion the change of the site of
      Orchomenus itself from the plain to the declivity of Mount
      Hyphanteion." (Ibid.)

  210 The phrase "hundred gates," &c., seems to be merely expressive of a
      great number. See notes to my prose translation, p. 162.

  211 Compare the following pretty lines of Quintus Calaber (Dyce's Select
      Translations, p 88).--

          "Many gifts he gave, and o'er
        Dolopia bade me rule; thee in his arms
        He brought an infant, on my bosom laid
        The precious charge, and anxiously enjoin'd
        That I should rear thee as my own with all
        A parent's love. I fail'd not in m                  wound)
        Embost within a shady hill, the jackals charge him round,
        And teare his flesh--when instantly fortune sends in the powers
        Of some sterne lion, with whose sighte they flie and he devours.
        So they around Ulysses prest."

                                                                 --Chapman.

  224 --_Simois, railing,_ &c.

          "In those bloody fields
        Where Simois rolls the bodies and the shields
        Of heroes."

                                                 --Dryden's Virgil, i. 142.

          225 "Where yon disorder'd heap of ruin lies,
        Stones rent from stones,--where clouds of dust arise,--
        Amid that smother, Neptune holds his place,
        Below the wall's foundatioRXAPelf to construct intimate and
      durable friendships, and this is a feature no less prominent in the
      earliest than in later times. It was indeed connected with the
      comparatively low estimation in which female society was held; but
      the devotedness and constancy with which these attachments were
      maintained, was not the less admirable and engaging. The heroic
      companions whom we find celebrated partly by Homer and partly in
      traditions which, if not of equal antiquity, were grounded on the
      same feeling, seem to have but one heart and soul, with scarcely a
      wish or object apart, and only to live as they are always ready to
      die for one another. It is true that the relation between them is
      not always one of perfect equality; but this is a circumstance
      which, while it often adds a peculiar charm to the poetical
      description, detracts little from the dignity of the idea which it
      presents. Such were the friendships of Hercules and Iolaus, of
      Theseus and Pirithous, of Orestes and Pylades; and though These may
      owe the greater part of their fame to the later epic or even
      dramatic poetry, the moral groundwork undoubtedly subsisted in the
      period to which the traditions are referred. The argument of the
      Iliad mainly turns on the affection of Achilles for Patroclus, whose
      love for the greater hero is only tempered by reverence for his
      higher birth and his unequalled prowess. But the mutual regard which
      united Idomeneus and Meriones, Diomedes and Sthenelus, thotion it.' Here it is clear from both speakers, that
      although Sarpedon is said to be fated to die, Jupiter might still,
      if he pleased, save him, and place him entirely out of the reach of
      any such event, and further, in the alternative, that Jupiter
      himself would destroy him by the hands of another."--Coleridge, p.
      156. seq.

  246 --_Thrice at the battlements._ "The art military of the Homeric age
      is upon a level with the state of navigation just described,
      personal prowess decided every thing; the night attack and the
      ambuscade, although much esteemed, were never upon a large scale.
      The chiefs fight in advance, and enact almost as much as the knights
      of romance. The siege of Troy was as little like a modern siege as a
      captain in the guards is like Achilles. There is no mention of a
      ditch or any other line or work round the town, and the wall itself
      was accessible without a ladder. It was probably a vast mound of
      earth with a declivity outwards. Patroclus thrice mounts it in
      armour. The Trojans are in no respects blockaded, and receive
      assistance from their allies to the very end."--Coleridge, p. 212.

  247 --_Ciconians._--A people of Thrace, near the Hebrus.

  248 --_They wept._

        "Fast by the manger stands the inactive steed,
        And, sunk in sorrow, hangs his languid head;
        He stands, and careless of his golden grain,
        Weeps his associates and his master slain."

                                         Merrick's Tryphiodorus, v. 18-24.

        "Nothing is heard upon the mountains now,
        But pensive herds that for their master low,
     men assembled for the purpose of judging as sitting on great
      stones, in a circle called the Urtheilsring or gerichtsring"-- Grote,
      ii. p. 100, note. On the independence of the judicial office in The
      heroic times, see Thirlwall's Greece, vol. i. p. 166.

  255 --_Another part,_ &c.

          "And here
        Were horrid wars depicted; grimly pale
        Were heroes lying with their slaughter'd steeds
        Upon the ground incarnadin'd with blood.
        Stern stalked Bellona, smear'd with reeking gore,
        Through charging ranks; beside her Rout was seen,
        And Terror, Discord to the fatal strife
        Inciting men, and Furies breathing flames:
        Nor absent were the Fates, and the tall shape
        Of ghastly Death, round whom did Battles throng,
        Their limbs distilling plenteous blood and sweat;
        And Gorgons, whose long locks were twisting snakes.
        That shot their forky tongues incessant forth.
        Such were the horrors of dire war."

                                                          --Dyce's Calaber.

  256 --_A field deep furrowed._

        "Here was a corn field; reapers in a row,
        Each with a sharp-tooth'd sickle in his hand,
        Work'd busily, and, as the harvest fell,
        Others were ready still to bind the sheaves:
        Yoked to a wain that bore the corn away
        The steers were moving; sturdy bullocks here
        The plough were drawing, and the furrow'd glebe
        Was black behind them, while with goading wand
        The active youths impell'd them. Here a feast
        Was graved: to the shrill pipe and ringing lyre
        A band of blooming virgins led the dance.
        As if endued with life."

                                                          --Dyce's Calaber.

  257 Coleridge (Greek Classic Poets, p. 182, seq.) has diligently
      compared this with the description of the shield of Hercules by
      Hesiod. He remarks that, "with tw to infuse.
        Brings nectar temper'd with ambrosial dews."

                                          Merrick's Tryphiodorus, vi. 249.

  260 "Hell is naked before him, and destruction hath no covering. He
      stretcheth out the north over the empty place, and hangeth the earth
      upon nothing. He bindeth up the waters in his thick clouds; and the
      cloud is not rent under them." Job xxvi. 6-8.

          261 "Swift from his throne the infernal monarch ran,
        All pale and trembling, lest the race of man,
        Slain by Jove's wrath, and led by Hermes' rod,
        Should fill (a countless throng!) his dark abode."

                                     Merrick's Tryphiodorus, vi. 769, sqq.

  262 These words seem to imply the old belief, that the Fates might be
      delayed, but never wholly set aside.

  263 It was anciently believed that it was dangerous, if not fatal, to
      behold a deity. See Exod. xxxiii. 20; Judg. xiii. 22.

          264 "Ere Ilium and the Trojan tow'rs arose,racter of the mountain torrents of Greece and Asia Minor.
      Their wide, shingly beds are in summer comparatively dry, so as to
      be easily forded by the foot passenger. But a thunder-shower in the
      mountains, unobserved perhaps by the traveller on the plain, may
      suddenly immerse him in the flood of a mighty river. The rescue of
      Achilles by the fiery arms of Vulcan scarcely admits of the same
      ready explanation from physical causes. Yet the subsiding of the
      flood at the critical moment when the hero's destruction appeared
      imminent, might, by a slight extension of the figurative parallel,
      be ascribed to a god symbolic of the influences opposed to all
      atmospheric moisture."--Mure, vol. i. p. 480, sq.

  270 Wood has observed, that "the circumstance of a falling tree, which
      is described as reaching from one of its banks to the other, affords
      a very just idea of the breadth of the Scamander."

  271 --_Ignominious._ Drowning, as compared with a death in the field of
      battle, was considered utterly disgraceful.

  272 --_Beneath a caldron._

        "So, when with crackling flames a caldron fries,
        The bubbling waters from the bottom rise.
        Above the brims they force their fiery way;
        Black vapours climb aloft, and cloud the day."

                                                Dryden's Virgil, vii. 644.

  273 "This tale of the temporary servitude of particular gods, by order
      of Jove, as a punishment for misbehaviour, recurs not unfrequently
      among the incidents of the Mythical world."--Grote, vol. i. p. 156.

  274 --_Not half so dreadful._

          "On the other side,
        Incensed with indignation, Satan stood
        Unterrified, and like a comet burn'd,
        That fires the length of Ophiuchus huge
        In the arctic sky, and from his horrid hair
        Shakes pestilence and war."

                                                 --Paradise Lost," h is sought, but, through the trembling band,
        No one dares answer to the proud demand.
        Presuming of his force, with sparkling eyes,
        Already he devours the promised prize.
        *          *          *          *
        If none my matchless valour dares oppose,
        How long shall Dares wait his dastard foes?"

                                             Dryden's Virgil, v. 486, seq.

          292 "The gauntlet-fight thus ended, from the shore
        His faithful friends unhappy Dares bore:
        His mouth and nostrils pour'd a purple flood,
        And pounded teeth came rushing with his blood."

                                                  Dryden's Virgil, v. 623.

  293 "Troilus is only once named in the Iliad; he was mentioned also in
      the Cypriad but his youth, beauty, and untimely end made him an
      object of great interest with the subsequent poets."--Grote, i, p.
      399.

  294 Milton has rivalled this passage describing the descent of Gabriel,
      "Paradise Lost," bk. v. 266, seq.

          "Down thither prone in flight
        He speeds, and through the vast ethereal sky
        Sails between worlds and worlds, with steady wing,
        Now on the polar winds, then with quick fan
        Winnows the buxom air. * * * *
        *           *               *             *
        At once on th' eastern cliff of Paradise
        He lights, and to his proper shape returns
        A seraph wing'd. * * * *
          Like Maia's son he stood,
        And shook his plumes, that heavenly fragrance fill'd
        The circuit wide."

      Virgil, Ćn. iv. 350:--

        "Hermes obeys; with golden pinions binds
        His flying feet, and mounts the western winds:
        And whether o'er the seas or earth he are not exactly like the tone of the earlier parts of the
      Iliad. They are almost too fine and pathetic. The whole passage
      defies translation, for there is that about the Greek which has no
      name, but which is of so fine and ethereal a subtlety that it can
      only be felt in the original, and is lost in an attempt to transfuse
      it into another language."--Coleridge, p. 195.

  296 "Achilles' ferocious treatment of the corpse of Hector cannot but
      offend as referred to the modern standard of humanity. The heroic
      age, however, must be judged by its own moral laws. Retributive
      vengeance on the dead, as well as the living, was a duty inculcated
      by the religion of those barbarous times which not only taught that
      evil inflicted on the author of evil was a solace to the injured
      man; but made the welfare of the soul after death dependent on the
      fate of the body from which it had separated. Hence a denial of the
      rites essential to the soul's admission into the more favoured
      regions of the lower world was a cruel punishment to the wanderer on
      the dreary shores of the infernal river. The complaint of the ghost
      of Patroclus to Achilles, of but a brief postponement of his own
      obsequies, shows how efficacious their refusal to the remains of his
      destroyer must have been in satiating the thirst of revenge, which,
      even after death, was supposed to torment the dwellers in Hades.
      Hence before yielding up the body of Hector to Priam, Achilles asks
      pardon of Patroclus for even this partial cession of his just rights
      of retribution."--Mure, vol. i. 289.

  297 Such was the fate of Astyanax, when Troy was taken.

        "Here, from the tow'r by stern Ulysses thrown,
        Andromache bewail'd her infant son."

                                           Merrick's Tryphiodorus, v. 675.

  298 The following observations of Coleridge furnish a most gallant and
      intCT GUTENBERG LICENSE


_Please read this before you distribute or use this work._

To protect the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work (or
any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"),
you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~}
License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.


General Terms of Use & Redistributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works


1.A.


By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work,
you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the
terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright)
agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this
agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee
for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work
and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement, you may
obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set
forth in paragraph 1.E.8.


1.B.


"Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be used on or
associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be
bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can
do with most Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works even without complying
with the full terms of this agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are
a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works if you
follow the terms of this agreement and help preservincluded with this eBook or online at http://www.gutenberg.org


1.E.2.


If an individual Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic work is derived from the
public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is posted with
permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied and
distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees or
charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you
must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7
or obtain permission for the use of the worce set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate
access to the full terms of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License.


1.E.6.


You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed,
marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word
processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted
on the official Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} web site (http://www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form.
Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} License as
specified in paragraph 1.E.1.


1.E.7.


Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing,
copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works unless you comply
with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.


1.E.8.


You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or
distributing Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} electronic works provided that

    - You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
      the use of Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} works calculated using the method you
      already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed to
      the owner of the Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} trademark, but he has agreed to
      donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project Gutenberg
      Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid within 60
      days following each date on which you prepare (or are legally
      required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty payments
      should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project Gutenbergfor
damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE
NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH
OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3. YOU AGREE THAT THE
FOUNDATION, THE TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT
WILL NOT BE LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL,
PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITYive
Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for
Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} and future generations. To learn more about the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations
can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation web page at
http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.


   Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of
Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service.
The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541.
Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf. Contributions to the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full
extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr.
S. Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations. Its business office is located at 809 North
1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org. Email contact links and up to date contact information
can be found at the Foundation's web site and official page at
http://www.pglaf.org

For additional contact information:


    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.


  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
                                Foundation


Project Gutenberg{~TRADE MARK SIGN~} depends upon and cannot survive without wide spread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of increasing the
number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment
including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are
particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States.
Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable
effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with these
requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations where we have not
received 
